C H A P T E R

7
Fermentation
O U T L I N E
Wine production

462

Prefermentation practices
Sorting
Prefermentative drying
Quality assessment
Stemming and crushing
Cryoextraction and supraextraction
Maceration (skin contact)
Dejuicing
Pressing
Must clarification
Adjustments to juice and must

464
464
464
464
464
466
466
474
474
478
479

Alcoholic fermentation
Fermentors
Fermentation
Biochemistry of alcoholic fermentation

489
489
494
497

Modern winemaking is almost unrecognizable from
its accidental and hesitant inception some 7500e9000
years ago. Improvements, once sporadic, have come at
an ever-increasing pace, reflecting scientific understanding and technologic advancements. Major improvements in glass production and the rediscovery of cork
as a closure during the 1600s favored the development
of wine styles that benefitted from aging. These advances also permitted the perfection and consistent production of sparkling wine. In the mid-1800s, Pasteur
initiated studies that began our understanding of the microbial nature of fermentation. He established not only
that yeasts initiated fermentation, but also that some
bacteria could cause wine spoilage. Only later were

Wine Science, Fifth Edition
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816118-0.00007-6

Yeasts
Yeast identification
Environmental factors affecting fermentation

502
504
516

Malolactic fermentation
Lactic acid bacteria
Effects of malolactic fermentation
Origin and growth of lactic acid bacteria
Factors affecting malolactic fermentation
Control

536
536
539
542
544
550

Appendix 7.1

553

Appendix 7.2

554

References

555

Suggested reading

571

some lactic acid bacteria found to be beneficial in
reducing excessive wine acidity. Investigations are still
ongoing on the microbial ecology of wine, with DNA
sequencing techniques discovering a growing number
of microbes present during and after fermentation.
What is uncertain is whether they are metabolically
active in a sensory significant way or just present.
Subsequent work by innumerable researchers and
winemakers has honed winemaking to its current sophisticated state. Further fine-tuning should permit the
seamless production of premium wines, showing the
quality connoisseurs expect and deserve. In addition,
distinctive features based on varietal, regional, or stylistic differences should become more discernible and

461

© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

462

7. Fermentation

controllable. Dr. Richard Peterson, a highly respected
winemaker in California, has commented that Mother
Nature is “a nasty old lady, who must be controlled.”
Modern enologic and viticultural science is increasingly
providing the means by which many of the vicissitudes
of Mother Nature’s effects can be mollified, but not
controlled. One of the more recent innovations involves
real-time monitoring of fermentation, permitting the
rapid detection of developing problems and implementation of remedial action (e.g., Kioroglou et al., 2018;
Roberts et al., 2018).
Although science can provide explanations and guidance, winemakers still need to make individual judgment calls about which technique or option to use. In
addition, major philosophical differences exist concerning how wine should be made. Some producers claim (at
least in public) that “wine is made in the vineyard”dthe
winemaker being only a handmaiden, facilitating the
grapes’ unique attributes to manifest themselves. Others
feel that grapes are simply “putty” in the hands of
skilled artisans (e.g., “flying winemakers”), and capable
of being molded as desired. Production procedures
certainly can direct wine development (within limits)
to possess the characteristics desired by the cellar master
or possess the attributes desired by target consumers.
These differences are the enologic equivalent of the
natureenurture debate in human development. Superimposed on these viewpoints may be limitations
imposed by traditional styles or appellation control regulations. Fundamentally, no decisions are inherently
right or wrong, just choices that are more or less appropriate or required under particular circumstances.
Because grape characteristics vary from vintage to vintage, no set production formula is possible. What is
crucial is that the winemaker be fully aware of the benefits and shortcomings of the techniques available,
selecting the optimal (or most judicious) procedure under the circumstances. In the following chapters, the advantages and disadvantages of alternative procedures
are presented to facilitate making rational decisions.

Wine production
Vinification formally begins when the grapes or juice
reaches the winery. The basic steps involved in the production of table wines are outlined in Fig. 7.1.
The first step involves removing leaves and other
extraneous material that were inadvertently collected
with the fruit. The grapes are typically crushed (or

pressed) to release the juice, and if desired, to initiate
maceration. Maceration facilitates the extraction of nutrients, flavorants, and other constituents from the
pulp, skins, seeds, and occasionally stems. Hydrolytic
enzymes released from ruptured cells promote this
liberation. The cytotoxic action of pectic enzymes further
promotes the release of cellular constituents into the
juice. Enzymes released or activated by cell death may
also synthesize flavor compounds and hydrolyze macromolecules into forms utilizable by yeast and bacteria.
For white wines, maceration is kept to a minimum
and seldom lasts more than a few hours. The juice that
runs freely from the crushed grapes (free-run) is usually
combined with that released by pressing. Because of
their different attributes, the free-run and first pressings
are usually clarified separately before combining and
joint fermentation. Subsequent pressings are typically
fermented separately. This avoids contaminating the
free- and first press-runs with undesirably high tannin
levels. It can also avoid the generation of off-odors, as
in the case of Sauvignon blanc grapes (Nikolantonaki
and Darriet, 2011).
For red wines, maceration is prolonged and occurs
simultaneously with the inception and action of alcoholic fermentation. The alcohol generated by yeast metabolism favors anthocyanin extraction, but most
solubilization occurs early during fermentation when
the alcohol content is still low (Canals et al., 2005).
Although anthocyanin absorption is reflected in the dynamics of total phenol extraction, seed tannin uptake is
more influenced by alcohol content. Anthocyanin
extraction is also a function of the cultivar (RomeroCascales, 2005), fruit ripeness (Canals et al., 2005), and
fermentation temperature and duration. Once extracted,
retention and color depend on another host of factors,
such as the pH, presence of soluble proteins, copigment
and tannin content, carbonyls, and other reactants.
The solubilized phenolic compounds give red wines
their basic appearance, taste, and flavor. They also give
red wines most of their aging and mellowing attributes.
In addition, ethanol promotes the liberation of relatively
water-insoluble aromatic ingredients from the pulp and
skins. After partial or complete fermentation, the freerun is collected as it flows away from the pomace (grape
solids). Subsequent pressings extract most remaining
juice (press fractions). These are incorporated with the
free-run fraction to the degree desired by the winemaker
as well as for the type and style of wine intended.
Rosé wines are made from red grapes typically given a
comparatively brief prefermentative maceration. This may

Wine production

Harvest

Stemming

Crushing
(White Wine)

(Red and Rosé Wines)

Maceration

Fermentation and maceration

Pressing

Pressing
(rosés
early)
(late
reds)

Fermentation

(Completion of fermentation)
Malolactic fermentation
(if desired)

Maturation and
natural clarification

Finishing and stabilization

Bottling

FIGURE 7.1

Flow diagram of winemaking.

involve grapes being crushed or gently broken with the
juice left in contact with the pomace at cool temperatures
until sufficient color has been extracted (w12e24 h). The
free-run juice is subsequently drawn off and fermented
similarly to that of a white wine. Alternatively, the grapes
may be pressed whole, a process that limits color extraction. The free-run and some of the first press-run juice is
fermented without further contact with the skins or seeds.
Where grape coloration is low, the fruit may be crushed
and fermented with the pomace until sufficient pigment
has been extracted. Subsequent fermentation of the freerun juice occurs without further pomace contact. When color depth is used to time pressing, consideration must
be taken of both pigmentation loss (associated with precipitation of yeast cells) and bleaching due to any sulfur
dioxide added. Because of the short (or incidental) maceration, alcoholic fermentation often begins in earnest only
after the juice is separated from the pomace.
Fermentation may start spontaneously due to
endemic yeasts derived from the grapes and winery
equipment. Standard practice now, however, is to inoculate the juice/must with one or more yeast strains of

463

known characteristics. Yeasts not only produce the
alcohol but also generate the general bouquet and flavor
attributes that typify wines.
After completing alcoholic fermentation, the wine may
be treated to foster a second, malolactic fermentation. This
is particularly valuable in cool climatic regions, where a
reduction in acidity ameliorates the wine’s taste. Although
most red wines undergo malolactic fermentation, fewer
white wines profit from its occurrence. The milder
fragrance of most white wines makes them more susceptible to accompanying sensory modifications. Acidity retention is essential to the fresh taste of white wines. In warm
viticultural regions, malolactic fermentation can be undesirable. Its development is usually discouraged by practices such as the addition of sulfur dioxide, early
clarification, and storage at cool temperatures.
Newly fermented wine is protected from or given
only minimal exposure to oxygen during maturation.
This limits oxidation and microbial spoilage. During
storage, excess carbon dioxide escapes, yeasty odors
dissipate, and suspended material precipitates. Changes
in aroma and the initiation of processes leading to an
aged bouquet may begin during maturation. Exposure
to air is usually limited to events such as racking or bâttonage (during sur lies maturation). Such slow or limited
exposure can help oxidize hydrogen sulfide and favor
color stability in red wines.
After several weeks to months, the wine is racked.
Racking separates the wine from solids that settle out
during spontaneous or induced clarification. The sediment consists primarily of yeast and bacterial cells,
grape cell debris, and precipitated tannins, proteins,
and potassium tartrate crystals. If left in contact with
wine, they could lead to the production of off-odors as
well as favor microbial spoilage.
Before bottling, the wine may be fined to remove suspended proteins and other materials. Otherwise, they
could generate haziness, especially if the wine is subsequently exposed to heat. Fining may also be used to
soften the wine’s taste by removing excess tannins.
Wines are commonly chilled and filtered to further
enhance clarification and stability.
At bottling, wines are generally given a small dose of
sulfur dioxide to limit oxidation and microbial spoilage
(about 0.8e1.5 mg/L free molecular SO2). Sweet wines
are usually sterile-filtered as a further protection against
microbial spoilage.
Newly bottled wines are normally aged at the winery for
several months or years before release. This permits wines,
blended shortly before bottling, to “harmonize.” In addition, it allows acetaldehyde, produced following bottling
(as a consequence of incidental oxygen uptake), to become

464

7. Fermentation

nonvolatile (chemically bound to other wine constituents).
Thus “bottle sickness,” usually attributed to free acetaldehyde, has vanished before the wine reaches the consumer.

Prefermentation practices
Sorting
Although stemmers effectively reject stems and most
leaf parts, they do not remove smaller material, such as
trellis clips, staples, wood splinters, snails, slugs, or insects,
although magnets can retain metal objects. Stemmers also
do not segregate out immature, diseased, raisined, or other
forms of substandard berries. As even small quantities of
inferior fruit can negatively impact wine quality, limiting
their incorporation is important. This has usually required
manual sorting. Due to labor costs (or unavailability), automatic sorters are becoming more common.
Automatic sorters can differentiate and selectively
remove undesirable material from harvested grapes
(Falconer and Hart, 2005). Rejection can be selected to function on color and/or size categories. As the fruit passes under the detector, located above a conveyer belt, the color
intensity of the grapes in the green, red, and infrared parts
of the spectrum is assessed. Depending on instructions
supplied by the operator, a computer determines whether
the sample should be rejected. A jet of air expels the undesired material. Although not inexpensive, automatic
sorters are more rapid and less expensive (amortized
over several years) than manual sorting. Whether such
an investment is merited will depend on the economic return based on need of use and improved wine quality.

Prefermentative drying
In some ways, this is a more controlled means of
achieving effects similar to those that occur naturally
with delayed harvest. Traditionally, it has been used to
achieve dehydration when producing sweet and fortified wines (see Mencarelli and Tonutti, 2013). However,
interest in the technique has expanded in the desire to
produce a new wine style. The technique usually goes
under its Italian name, appassimento. Although historically used to produce sweet (and some sparkling) wines,
its current fame rests primarily with the production
Amarone della Valpolicella. The occasional association
of some grapes with a form of noble rotting during the
drying period was unsuspected and generated a unique
flavor (see Recioto-style wines, Chapter 9). However, in
most current applications, the grapes remain healthy,
only experiencing those chemical changes associated
with overmaturation (and slight dehydration). Storage
temperatures have traditionally been cool, but experimentation with warmer temperatures is being assessed.

If juice concentration (and the accompanying higher
alcohol content of the wine) is undesired and enhanced
anthocyanin accumulation is wanted, mid-season basal
leaf removal may be practiced.
Formerly, grape clusters were arranged in single layers
on mats or porous trays and placed either in the sun (sweet
white wines) or in well-ventilated warehouses (red grapes).
The current trend is to use temperature-regulated drying
chambers to achieve a quicker, more regulated level of
overmaturation/dehydration. Depending on the style
desired, avoiding sun exposure (and its associated heating) limits the browning of white wines and enhances
the color depth of red wines. A wide range of metabolic
adjustments occurs during drying, affecting ethylene production, flavor development, and the type and accumulation of phenolics (Bonghi et al., 2012).

Quality assessment
Shortly after the grapes reach the winery, they are
subjected to a series of chemical and quality checks. At
a minimum, their soluble solids ( Brix), acidity, and
phenolic contents are assessed. Such data are important
not only because adjustment may be necessary before
fermentation, but also because the final price supplied
to the grower is frequently based on these attributes.
In addition, acceptance, rejection, and price for the
crop are affected by the proportion of diseased grapes.
For example, the degree of Botrytis infection has often
been assessed relative to gluconic acid content. Gluconic
acid is not a fully reliable measure, however, since it may
arise from other sources. More specific measures of
Botrytis infection include PTA-ELISA (Obanor et al.,
2004), tube immunoassays (Dewey and Meyer, 2004),
or microfluidic immunosensor with micromagnetic
beads coupled with carbon-based screen-printed electrodes (Fernández-Baldo et al., 2010).

Stemming and crushing
Stemming and crushing are typically conducted as
soon as possible after harvesting. During the harvest,
some grapes are unavoidably broken and their juice
released, whereas others may be bruised. Thus, oxidative browning often begins before the grapes reach
the winery and crushing begins. The escaped juice
also becomes field-inoculated with epiphytic yeast
and bacteria. If the berries are harvested during the
heat of the day, undesirable microbial contamination
can rapidly ensue. To minimize this occurrence, grapes
may be sulfited at harvest or preferably harvested during cooler parts of the day.
Left in containers, harvested fruit quickly warms due
to the metabolic activity of grapes and the insulating

Prefermentation practices

465

influence of the volume. This can aggravate contamination by speeding microbial activity. In addition, warming may necessitate the expense of cooling to bring the
temperature down to an acceptable, prefermentation
value.
Stemming
The current trend is to separate the processes of stemming and crushing. The removal of stems, leaves, and
grape stalks (termed MOGdmaterial other than grapes)
before crushing has several advantages. Notably, it minimizes the uptake of phenolics and lipids from these materials. The extraction of stem phenols may be of
potential value when dealing with red varieties low in
phenol content, such as Pinot noir. Stem phenols are intermediate in astringency and bitterness relative to the
less strident tastes of skin tannins and the more assertive
seed tannins. The phenolics extracted from stems
include catechins, flavonols (notably quercetin), and caftaric acid (Sun et al., 1999).
In the past, stems were often left with the must
throughout fermentation, especially in the production
of red wines (to generate channels through which juice
or wine could more easily escape, facilitating pressing).
In poor vintages, the enhanced tannin content also gave
the wines extra body and improved color density. Stems
can also augment the supply of long-chain unsaturated
fatty acids (Bréchot et al., 1971), improving the ability
of yeasts to complete fermentation under cool cellar
conditions.
Leaf removal before crushing limits the formation
and uptake of C6 (“leaf”) aldehydes and alcohols.
They are produced during the enzymatic oxidation of
linoleic and linolenic acids extracted from the leaf
cuticle. Leaf aldehydes and alcohols can taint wine
with a grassy to herbaceous odor. Nonetheless, they
may contribute to the typical aroma of some wines in
small amounts. High leaf content in the must may also
result in excessive uptake of quercetin. This can lead to
the formation of a yellowish haze in white wines (Somers and Ziemelis, 1985). If the wines are matured sufficiently, much of the quercetin precipitates before
bottling. High flavonol contents derived from leaves
can also generate white wine bitterness.
For convenience and efficiency, the same equipment
often performs both stemming and crushing. Stemmers
often possess an outer perforated cylinder that permits
berry exit but restricts the passage of stems, stalks, and
leaves (Fig. 7.2). Rotation of a series of flexible paddles
situated on the ends of spirally arranged arms on a central shaft draws the grape clusters into the stemmer.
The fruit is forced through the perforations in the outer
cylinder, and the stems and leaves are expelled via a
terminal outlet. When stemmer-crushers are working
optimally, the fruit is separated from the leaves and

FIGURE 7.2 Internal view of a crusher-stemmer. Photo courtesy of
the Wine Institute.

stems with minimal breakage. Expelling the stems
and leaves in as dry a state as possible avoids juice
loss and facilitates disposal. Stems and other vine remains may be chopped for composting and subsequent
soil incorporation.
Crushing
Since time immemorial, crushing involved the action of
human feet in a relatively shallow container, often slotted
to aid juice escape and collection. The ancient Egyptians
put horizontally positioned rods over these containers,
from which short ropes dangled. They were used by the
crusher(s) to remain upright. More commonly, the
crushers linked arms to remain standing, as they danced
within the slurry of juice, skins, seeds, and berries. It was
only in the early part of the 1800s that mechanical crushers
began to replace treading. Although still used in a few situations, as for some quinta ports, the old procedure has
otherwise been relegated to history. It was doomed more
by labor costs and the movement of farm workers to the cities than the queasy stomachs of citified consumers.
Stemming usually precedes crushing. Because some
berries are unavoidably broken during stemming, leading to oxidative browning, crushing often occurs immediately after or simultaneously in a stemmer-crusher.
Crushing may be accomplished by several processes.
Those generally preferred involve pressing the fruit
against a perforated wall or passing them through a set
of rollers. In the former, the berries are broken open and
the juice, pulp, seeds, and skins collected and pumped to
a retaining tank or vat. In the latter process, berries are

466

7. Fermentation

crushed between a pair of rollers rotating toward each
other. The rollers usually have spiral ribbing or contain
grooves with interconnecting profiles. These draw the
grapes between the rollers, crushing the grapes. Spacing
between the rollers can be adjusted to accommodate
cultivar or yearly variation in berry size. This avoids seed
rupture and contaminating the must with seed oils. Their
oxidation could lead to the development of rancid odors.
Crushing can also be achieved by centrifugal force. In
centrifugal crushers, the fruit is spun against the sides of
the crusher, which tends to turn the fruit into a pulpy slurry.
Because this complicates juice clarification and may
rupture seeds, centrifugal crushers are generally eschewed.
Although grapes are customarily crushed before vinification, there are exceptions, notably sparkling wine. In
this instance, whole grape clusters are pressed versus
“crushed.” Special broad shallow presses have historically been used to extract the juice to minimize pigment and
tannin extraction. This is particularly important when
white sparkling wine is made from red-skinned grapes.
These ancient presses are being replaced by more efficient
pneumatic presses, which also take up much less space
and involve less labor. Pressing intact grape clusters has
also become popular with some table wine producers.
It reduces the extraction of soluble solids by up to 60%
e70% and phenolic content by 10%e35% (Seckler,
1997), thereby reducing the need for clarification.
Botrytized grapes are also frequently pressed whole
versus crushed. The gentler juice separation minimizes
the liberation of fungal dextran (b-glucans) polymers.
These glucans can quickly plug filters used in clarification. In the production of Tokaji Eszencia, even pressing
is avoided. Only the juice that drains away freely from
the heavily infected grapes is used.
In the production of wines employing full or partial
carbonic maceration, such as Vino Novello and Beaujolais, it is essential that most fruit remains uncrushed until grape cell fermentation has ended. It donates the
characteristic fragrance shown by these wines. After a
variable period of autofermentation, berries that have
not broken under their own weight during this initial
phase are pressed to release their juice. Fermentation is
completed by yeast action.
In the past, inefficient crushing often left a portion of
the grapes remaining uncrushed (Henderson, 1824).
Thus, many wines in former times would have experienced partial carbonic maceration.
While the means of berry rupture before (or during)
pressing is critical to the characteristics of the juice/
must obtained, how the grapes were harvested and their
state of health significantly influence its properties
(Fig. 7.3). How it is transferred to fermentation tanks
can also affect juice/must quality (Seckler et al., 2001).

Cryoextraction and supraextraction
An alternative to crushing is cryoextraction (Defranoux
et al., 1989). It involves cooling the grapes to 4 C,
freezing those low in sugar content. Thus, only unfrozen grapes release most of their juice during subsequent pressing. It helps to augment the sugar content
of juice obtained. A variant of the technique (supraextraction) allows the grapes to warm to about 10 C
before pressing. Freezing causes both grape cell
rupture and skin splitting, facilitating the escape of
juice during pressing. Although increasing the extraction of sugars and phenolics, supraextraction reduces
total acidity and raises the pHdlikely the result of crystallization and precipitation of tartrate salts. Whether
these features are desirable will depend on the intention of the winemaker and characteristics of the grapes.
A comparison with other techniques is provided by
Busse-Valverde et al. (2010).

Maceration (skin contact)
Maceration refers to a period during which constituents diffuse out of the pomace (grape solids) into the
juice. Its effects depend primarily on its duration but
also on factors such as concentration differentials, solvent and solute chemistry (molecular size and polarity),
surface area, membrane permeability (if cells are not
ruptured), hydrolytic enzyme action, temperature,
agitation, and exposure to ethanol (if occurring simultaneously with fermentation).
With red wines, the duration of maceration can be as
long as or longer than fermentation. In contrast, maceration is short with rosé wines and may be almost nonexistent with some white wines. When the maceration
period is short, a pectinase preparation is often added to
the must immediately after crushing. This speeds tissue
disintegration, facilitating juice release during pressing,
and speeds settling during clarification. It also promotes
the rapid release of flavorants from the skins. Enzyme
preparations are discussed more fully later in the chapter.
White wines
With the shift to light fruity white wines in the 1970s,
maceration was reduced to a minimum. This trend was
encouraged by the widespread adoption of mechanical
harvesting. Stemming and crushing could occur in the
field, with only the juice transported to the winery.
Where whole grapes were delivered to the winery, there
was always some grape rupture and associated maceration before arrivaldthe extent depending on the
cultivar, maturity, machine operation, time separating
harvest and crushing/pressing, and temperature.

467

Prefermentation practices

100

100
Free run
Press fraction 1
Press fraction 2

80

80

Total

70
60

70

(A) Health grapes

60

(B) Grapes with rot

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

Manual harvesting,
bins

Machine harvesting,
gondola

40

Machine harvesting,
bins

40

Machine harvesting,
gondola

50

Machine harvesting,
bins

50

Manual harvesting,
bins

Sediment/lees (% v/v)

90

Sediment/lees (% v/v)

90

FIGURE 7.3 Sediment relative to harvesting technique and berry firmness. From Christmann, M., Freund, M., 2010. Advances in grape processing
equipment. In: Reynolds, A.G. (Ed.), Managing Wine Quality. Vol. I. Viticulture and Wine Quality, pp. 547e558. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., Cambridge,
UK. Data from Seckler, J., 1997. Ganztraubenpressung, ATW-Forschungsbericht Nr. 88. Darmstadt, Germany, reproduced by permission by Elsevier.

enzymatic actions. Thus, there is renewed interest in
extended maceration, occasionally up to 3e7 days.

40
35

Concentrations
(ug/kg of skin or pulp)

Minimizing these influences reduced the uptake of heatunstable proteins, thereby decreasing the need for
protein stabilization products such as bentonite.
Because most varietal flavorants are located in the
skins (Fig. 7.4), minimizing maceration reduced uptaked
the degree depending on the flavorant, cultivar, and
grape maturity (Fig. 7.5). For wines depending on skinderived aromatics (e.g., Gewürztraminer and Muscat cultivars), this became increasingly significant with the
adoption of gentler pressing methods (e.g., pneumatic
and whole-grape pressing) (Fig. 7.6). This deficiency
can be partially offset by increasing the use of press-run
fractions. For example, the uptake of varietal thiol precursors is markedly enhanced by using fractions derived at
the end of the press cycle (Patel et al., 2010; Roland
et al., 2011). Adjusting the proportion of late free- and
press-run fractions is often easier to manipulate than
maceration time due to the complexities of temperature
and duration on extraction, precipitation, and degeneration of compounds during maceration. Nevertheless,
increasing reliance on the use of press fractions augments
the wine’s phenolic content. Pectinase addition could
speed the liberation of skin-derived aromatics but may
have undesirable sensory effects due to unsuspected

Cys3MH
G3MH

30
G4MMP
25
20
15
10
5
0

Melon B. skin

Melon B. pulp Sauvignon blanc Sauvignon blanc
skin
pulp

FIGURE 7.4 Mean concentration of cysteinylated and glutathionylated precursor concentrations for S-3-(1-hexanol cysteine)
(Cys3MH and G3MH) and S-4-(4-methyl-4-mercapto-2-pentanone)
(G4MMP) in Melon B. and Sauvignon blanc skin and pulp (results are
expressed in mg of precursor per kg of initially fresh skin or pulp of the
corresponding grapes). Reprinted from Roland, A., Schneider, R., Charrier, F., Cavelier, F., Rossignol, M., Razungles, A., 2011. Distribution of
varietal thiol precursors in the skin and the pulp of Melon B. and Sauvignon
blanc grapes. Food Chem. 125, 139e144, with permission from Elsevier.

468

7. Fermentation

Relative concentration

Geraniol

210

210

180
150

180

120

150

90

120

60

90

30

60
30

SC (15) +H

3

H
SC (15)
Juice tr
eatm

SC (4)

ents

FR

1

Rip

2
stage
in
n
e g

Linalool

Relative concentration

35
35

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15
10
10
5

5

SC (15) +H

3

H
SC (15)
Juice tr
eatm

SC (4)

ents

FR

1

Rip

2
stage
in
en g

FIGURE 7.5 The effect of grape maturity and juice treatment on the relative concentration of geraniol and linalool in Gewürztraminer juice.
Ripening stage: 1 ¼ 22.0 Brix, 2 ¼ 23.0 Brix, 3 ¼ 24.0 Brix; FR¼Free-run, SC(4) ¼ Skin contact for 4 h, SC(15) ¼ Skin contact for 15 h, H ¼ heat
treatment (70 C for 15 min), SC(15)þH ¼ Combined skin contact for 15 h and heat treatment. From Mass Marais, J., 1987. Terpene concentrations and
wine quality of Vitis vinifera L. cv. Gewürztraminer as affected by grape maturity and cellar practices. Vitis 26, 231e245, reproduced by permission.

However, increasing varietal and fruit flavors by
extending the duration of skin contact may also result
in a deterioration in mouthfeel (Tamborra, 1992). The
latter may be a consequence of increased potassium uptake (reduced acidity) and/or enhanced phenolic extraction (increased bitterness) (Sokolowshy et al., 2015).
Greater phenolic uptake could also augment astringency
and browning potential. Although these effects have
been observed in some studies, they have not been
consistently found.
Procedures that may diminish the negative effects of
extended maceration include the use of cool

temperatures (5e8 C) and hyperoxygenation (CejudoBastante et al., 2011a). Hyperoxidation likely has its effect by promoting the oxidation and precipitation of
flavonoid phenolics during fermentation. Regrettably,
hyperoxidation may undesirably modify the wine’s
fragrance (Cejudo-Bastante et al., 2011b). Another alternative is to freeze some or all of the grapes before crushing (cryogenic maceration). Freezing ruptures cell
membranes, facilitating the escape of flavorants. Another
option is to retain a fraction of the crop for addition as
whole grapes during fermentation (Bavcar et al., 2011).
Both procedures may enhance the fruity/floral fragrance

Prefermentation practices
32,0

Sedimentationstrub [% vol.]

35
30
25
19,5
20
13,5
15
10

8,0
5,7

6,1

5
0

1992er Riesling
< 5% Infection

1992er Riesling
ca. 20% Infection

Whole cluster pressing

1993er Riesling
ca. 50% Infection

Conventional treatment

FIGURE 7.6 Influence of method of pressing (whole cluster vs.
conventional destemming and crushing) as well as the degree of grape
botrytization on the amount of soluble solids. Modified from Seckler, J.,
1997. Ganztraubenpressung, ATW-Forschungsbericht Nr. 88. Darmstadt,
Germany, reproduced by permission.

of the wine. Like most choices in winemaking, each decision has its pros and cons and needs to be investigated,
preferably experimentally at the winery, before adoption.
As noted, adding macerating (pectinase) enzymes to
the must is frequently used to facilitate the release of flavorants. This effect continues after pressing. Because cell
fragments are often extracted with the juice, the enzymes can continue to release aromatics during settling
before juice clarification.
What the winemaker needs to estimate is the relative
importance of skin-derived flavorants relative to the
ease and extent of phenolic extraction. These properties
are largely cultivar-dependent but also vary with vineyard and vintage conditions, grape health and maturity,
and conditions during maturation. Determining the
relative extraction of seed versus skin phenolic has
been made easier with the development of a technique
that can directly differentiate between them (Peyrot
des Gachons and Kennedy, 2003).
If the situation were not complicated enough, in the
case of the varietal thiols, the concentration of precursors in the juice is not directly correlated with the presence of the volatile (free) thiols. Their release appears to
be more dependent on liberation during harvesting than
during fermentation (Allen et al., 2011).
Although maceration enhances phenolic extraction, it
does not lead to the same astringency that characterizes
red wine. This not only reflects the much longer maceration of red wines and its association with fermentation

469

(accumulation of ethanol) but also the absence of anthocyanins. Anthocyanins, although tasteless, bind with
catechins and flavonoid tannins (see Chapter 6),
increasing their solubility. In white wines, most
extracted phenolics precipitate during fermentation,
limiting their effects on the wine’s sensory attributes.
Grape varieties differ considerably in the phenolics
released during crushing or extracted during maceration. For example, few flavonoids accumulate in the
musts of Palomino and Sauvignon fdb blanc; moderate
amounts accumulate in the musts of Riesling, Sémillon,
and Chardonnay; whereas extensive extraction occurs
with Muscat Gordo, Colombard, Trebbiano, and Pedro
Ximénez (Somers and Pocock, 1991). Increased extraction favors subsequent in-bottle browning. This feature
may be partially offset by hyperoxygenation (CejudoBastante et al., 2011b).
The major physical factors influencing phenol extraction are temperature and duration. Extraction is often linearly related to both factors. Cool temperatures and short
duration reduce the uptake of flavonoids (Fig. 7.7),
limiting potential bitterness and astringency but also
limiting their antioxidant benefits. This can be an important concern for cultivars such as Sauvignon blanc that
depend on thiols for much of their varietal character. In
this regard, techniques such as semicarbonic maceration
(see Chapter 9), possibly combined with cryogenic techniques, are being investigated to enhance the concentration of antioxidant phenolics while still maintaining a
traditional mouthfeel (Olegar et al., 2015) (instead of adding press fractions to the wine).
Occasionally, the concentration of extracted compounds decreases with prolonged maceration, presumably due to precipitation and/or degradation. Extraction
also varies markedly with the relative solubility of the
class of compound, its deposition within the cell (storage
vacuole vs. bound to cell-wall constituents), tissue (seed,
skin, stem), and berry ripeness. Although many nonflavonoids quickly escape into the juice, subsequent extraction
of flavonoid phenolics occurs more readily than nonflavonoids (Fig. 7.7).
Aswithphenolics,theconcentrationofflavorantsandnutrients in the juice is markedly influenced by the duration of
maceration. For example, skin contact augments the uptake
of monoterpenes (Marais, 1996). The content of amino
acids, fatty acids, and higher alcohols may rise, whereas total acidity falls (Soufleros and Bertrand, 1988; Guitart et al.,
1997). The decline in acidity appears to be caused by the
increased release of potassium. The latter induces tartrate
salt formation and precipitation. Other changes result
from indirect effects on yeast metabolism. For example,

470

7. Fermentation

(A) 400

(B) 400

28.6°

23.0°
28.6°

300

Concentration (mg/L)

Concentration (mg/L)

300

23.0°

200

15.5°

15.5°

9.7°
200

100

100

9.7°
0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time (hr)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time (hr)

FIGURE 7.7 Flavonoid (A) and nonflavonoid (B) phenol content in Chardonnay must during skin contact. Temperatures are in  C. From
Ramey, D., Bertrand, A., Ough, C.S., Singleton, V.L., Sanders, E., 1986. Effects of skin contact temperature on Chardonnay must and wine composition. Am.
J. Enol. Vitic. 37, 99e106, reproduced by permission.

increased amino acid extraction has been correlated with
reduced hydrogen sulfide (Vos and Gray, 1979).
Occasionally, a short exposure (15 min) to high temperatures (w70 C) greatly increases the release of volatile compounds, such as monoterpenes (Marais, 1996;
see Fig. 7.5). Although the concentration of most monoterpenes increases on short-term exposure to hightemperature maceration, not all follow this trend. For
example, the concentration of geraniol decreases.
Generally, maceration is conducted at cool temperatures. This not only has the advantage of suppressing
the growth of potential spoilage organisms before the
onset of active fermentation but also affects the subsequent synthesis of yeast flavorants during fermentation. For example, the synthesis of volatile esters may
increase with a rise in maceration temperature up to
15 C but decrease thereafter. The synthesis of most alcohols (apart from methanol) is reduced following
maceration at warmer temperatures (Fig. 7.8).
Although methanol content increases due to the action
of grape pectinases (releasing methyl groups from pectins), this effect is insignificant even with cultivars

requiring pectinase enzyme addition (Lee et al., 1975).
Methanol concentrations are usually well below limits
set by the OIV.
The sensory influence of maceration can also be influenced by the degree of oxygen exposure. This can occur
during crushing or via intentional exposure (hyperoxygenation). In either case, the oxygen content rapidly declines
to almost zero within a few minutes after crushing or the
termination of hyperoxygenation (Dubernet and
Ribéreau-Gayon, 1974; Silva and Lambri, 2006).
Oxygen promotes the enzymatic oxidation of the primary phenolics in white must (nonflavonoid o-diphenols, notably caftaric acid). Although their
polymerization causes juice browning, the polymers
usually precipitate during fermentation. This tends to
leave the wine less sensitive to subsequent in-bottle
oxidation as well as lower in bitterness.
Hyperoxygenation seemingly would be ill-advised
with some cultivars, such as Sauvignon blanc. It can
reduce (oxidize) important varietal aroma compounds.
Nonetheless, the presence of oxygen during maceration
can promote the formation of thiol precursors (Larcher

Prefermentation practices

90

Methanol

Concentration (mg/L)

70

50
Isobutyl
Active amyl

30

1—Propanol

2—Phenethanol

10
8

16
24
Skin contact temperature (°C)

32

FIGURE 7.8

Concentration of various alcohols in Chardonnay
wine as a function of skin contact temperature. From Ramey, D., Bertrand, A., Ough, C.S., Singleton, V.L., Sanders, E., 1986. Effects of skin
contact temperature on Chardonnay must and wine composition. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 37, 99e106, reproduced by permission.

et al., 2013). Hyperoxidation may also be ill-advised
with cultivars low in glutathione contents (important
antioxidant limiting browning potential) but may be
offset by the addition of glutathione along with sulfur
dioxide. Alternatively, natural glutathione presence
may be enhanced by extended skin contact and pressing
under nitrogen (Pons et al., 2015).
Partially to facilitate early phenolic oxidation and
removal, sulfur dioxide addition at crushing is generally
avoided where possible, as it limits the action of grape
polyphenol oxidase. In addition, sulfur dioxide can undesirably enhance the production of acetaldehyde and
several other aldehydes during fermentation (Frivik
and Ebeler, 2003), augment phenolic extraction, and
retard the initiation of malolactic fermentation (if
desired). Adding sulfur dioxide at or just after crushing
is now largely limited to situations where a significant
proportion of the crop is diseased or damaged or where
the interval between harvesting and crushing is protracted. Sulfur dioxide retards the multiplication of bacteria or other potentially undesirable microbes. When

471

added, sulfur dioxide is applied several hours before
yeast inoculation. This allows time for the sulfur dioxide
to inhibit contaminant organisms and bind with other
wine constituents. This reduces the free molecular SO2
content, thereby limiting any disruption to the activity
and multiplication of the inoculated yeast.
Maceration has been observed to improve juice fermentability (Ollivier et al., 1987) and enhance yeast
viability. Part of these effects is due to the greater release
of particulate matter, lipids, and soluble nitrogen compounds into the juice. Particulate matter is well known
to increase microbial growth. The solids provide surfaces
on which microbes can adhere and grow; nutrients
adhere and/or be released; toxic C10 and C12 carboxylic
fatty acids absorb; and nucleation of carbon dioxide bubbles initiate. The associated effervescence increases must
agitation, encouraging uniform nutrient distribution.
Skin contact facilitates the extraction of long-chain
(C16 and C18) saturated and unsaturated fatty acids,
such as palmitic, oleanolic, linolenic, and linoleic acids.
These reduce the synthesis of toxic, mid-chain (C10 and
C12) fatty acids (Guilloux-Benatier et al., 1998). The
former lipids are important in permitting multiplying
yeast cells to generate the steroids needed to construct
new cell membranes under the anaerobic conditions of
active fermentation (Deytieux et al., 2005). In addition,
the small amounts of oxygen absorbed during crushing
and other prefermentation cellar activities permit the
synthesis of essential sterols by yeasts.
Extended skin contact also improves (more than doubles) the production of extracellular mannoproteins
formed during alcoholic fermentation. The effects of
increased mannoprotein content and reduced synthesis
of C10 and C12 fatty (carboxylic) acids combine to facilitate
malolactic fermentation (Guilloux-Benatier et al., 1998).
In general, minimal maceration at cool temperatures is
often preferred for the production of young, fresh, fruity
wines. Longer, warmer maceration favored the production
of Chardonnay wine deeper in color and fuller flavored.
The latter also tends to mature more quickly during barrel
aging and develop a more complex character than wines
produced with minimal skin contact (Ramey et al., 1986).
Longer maceration times also produced Chenin Blanc
wines with a shift from fresh and tropical flavors (due to
terpenes, esters, and thiols) to riper fruit notes
(Aleixandre-Tudo et al., 2015). Thus, varietal characteristics
(Singleton et al., 1980), fruit quality, equipment availability,
and market demands can all play a role in the decision of a
winemaker to use maceration, and to what extent.
Cell-cracking is a comparatively new procedure proposed as a complement to or replacement for maceration
(Bach et al., 1990). The procedure involves forcing the

472

7. Fermentation

must through narrow gaps, separating steel balls positioned in a small bore. It is reported to speed the extraction of flavorants.
Rosé wines
Occasionally, rosé wines are made directly from juice
released by pressing whole grape clusters. Nevertheless,
the more common practice is to gently stem and crush
the grapes before pressing. This may or may not be followed by a period of prefermentative maceration lasting
up to 24 h. If this occurs at 20 C, microbial action tends
to be retarded. Data from Murat and Dumeau (2005) suggest that the upper portion of the temperature range might
be preferable due to improved extraction of the precursor
of 3-mercaptohexan-1-ol located in the skin. Its metabolic
conversion to the fruity smelling 3-mercaptohexan-1-ol is
also favored during fermentation at about 20 C.
Short maceration limits both tannin and anthocyanin
uptake, respectively, to about 25% and 10% of that of red
winesdgenerating the wine’s pinkish coloration. With
few tannins, rosé wines tend to show poor color
stabilitydmuch of the color being derived from free anthocyanins or their self-association or copigment complexes. Despite their relatively low anthocyanin
content, they still act as important antioxidants. For
example, they retard the oxidation of 3mercaptohexan-1-ol (and the rapid loss of its desired
aroma). In addition, low levels of catechin uptake are
important in limiting other volatile thiols from forming
nonvolatile complexes with oxidized phenolics (Nikolantonaki et al., 2010). Sulfur dioxide also helps to protect aromatic thiols from oxidation but may contribute
to muting their perception by forming nonvolatile sulfonates. Phenethyl acetate and isoamyl acetate are also significant contributors to the fruity flavor of many rosé
wines (Murat, 2005).
It is important that maceration occurs under anaerobic conditions. This not only limits oxidation of
important volatile thiols but equally protects anthocyanins from oxidative discoloration. Somewhat surprisingly, oxygen ingress after bottling reportedly favors
the floral and fruity attributes of Grenache rosé wines
(Wirth et al., 2012).
Adding pectolytic enzymes during maceration can
improve anthocyanin extraction, enhancing color stability
and improving flavor development (Salinas et al., 2003).
Both features are important to the shelf life of rosé wines.
Typically, only free-run juice is used in rosé production. Unless the grapes were comparatively immature
(before full coloration), the anthocyanin content of the
press-run is often too high for use in rosé production.
The anthocyanin content for rosé wines is generally in

the range of 20e50 mg/L. Tannins in the press-run juice
can also donate excessive bitterness. The press-run juice
may be added to the must used to produce a red wine or
other wine products.
Occasionally a portion of the juice is drawn off from a
red wine fermentation to produce a rosé. The remaining
must is used to produce the red wine. The technique,
called saignée, has particular value in years or with cultivars where color extraction is likely to be less than that
desired for the production of a red wine.
To decrease the likelihood of oxidative browning and
color change during aging, sulfur dioxide is usually supplied at bottling at levels equivalent to those of white
wines. In addition, enologic tannins may also be added
to increase color stability.
In a novel solution to grape waste in the juice industry, Pedroza et al. (2011) have investigated the addition
of dehydrated red grape skins to white wine to produce
a rosé. Apparently, the results have attributes equivalent
to those of more traditionally produced rosé wines.
Red wines
Assessing the conditions and duration of maceration
are no less difficult for red wines than for other wines.
The major problem relates to the shifting states of the
various phenolics extracted and their subsequent retention (e.g., bonding and precipitation with cell remnants
and yeasts after fermentation). Correspondingly,
extending the duration of maceration (before and during
fermentation) may not necessarily increase wine coloration but can enhance color stability. In addition, anthocyanins and other flavonoids begin to interact in complex
ways with each other and other wine constituents during fermentation, maturation, and aging. These changes
are partially dependent on the increasing alcohol content of the must, the production of yeast metabolites,
and slow nonenzymic reactions. Such modifications
have significant influences on the wine’s color stability
as well as its ultimate gustatory, tactile, and flavor characteristics. These parameters vary with the cultivar, conditions during grape development, and the method of
crushing as well as temperature and agitation during
fermentation. Thus, general recommendations, in the
sense of a paint-by-numbers approach, are impossible.
Furthermore, it is becoming clearer that what may be
an appropriate procedure for vinifera cultivars may not
be applicable to hybrid and non-vinifera grapes (Manns
et al., 2013).
One of the properties of FrencheAmerican hybrids
and other non-vinifera cultivars is their greater disease
resistance. This relates to their propensity to produce
pathogenesis-related proteins in response to biotic and

Prefermentation practices

abiotic stresses. In wine, though, they can bind and precipitate phenolic compounds (Burtch et al., 2017), thus
limiting the wine’s color stability and aging potential.
These may not be disadvantages where the wine is
consumed (young) but does limit the wine’s appeal to
those who consider a wine’s long-aging potential as critical to quality.
Most maceration studies have focused on pigment
and tannin rather than flavorant extraction. Anthocyanins, being more soluble, are the first extracted. As
fermentation becomes active, ethanol production not
only enhances solubility but also facilitates anthocyanin
escape by increasing membrane porosity. Smaller oligomeric tannins (proanthocyanidins) are also comparatively water soluble, whereas larger polymeric tannins
are more dependent on increasing ethanol content and
must agitation for their extraction. The dynamics of
tannin extraction, precipitation, and binding with cell
constituents (primarily cell-wall polysaccharides)
throughout the course of fermentation are still incompletely understood.
Both the style and consumer acceptance of wine can
be dramatically affected by how the duration and conditions of maceration affect phenolic extraction. Thus,
maceration provides one of the principal means by
which winemakers can adjust the character of their
wines. Short macerations (<24 h) typically produce a
rosé. For the production of early maturing reds, maceration times are limited to about 3e5 days by pressing
the fermenting must. Fermentation continues to completion off the pomace. This provides good coloration and
avoids the uptake of excessive amounts of harshtasting seed tannins but extracts sufficient skin tannins
to favor color stability.
Although often viewed negatively by some wine
critics, the desirability and promotion of techniques producing early-drinking wines is not new, being strongly
advocated for the best Médoc wines in Bordeaux as early
as the 1870s (Thudichum and Dupré, 1872, page 324).
However, would 4 years in barrel and 2 in bottle be
interpreted as “early drinking” today?
Other options influencing the relative proportion of
skin to seed tannins extracted involve grape maturity
(Hanlin et al., 2010; Bindon and Kennedy, 2011), adding
grape cell-wall polysaccharides to the must (Bindon
et al., 2010), maceration temperature, and pumpingover and pressing methods (Bindon and Kennedy,
2011). Additional factors affecting the ratio of seed to
skin tannins include the number of seeds per berry (Harbertson et al., 2002) and seed cuticle thickness. The latter,
however, are largely beyond the winemaker’s control
other than by cultivar choice.

473

Most flavonoids reach peak extraction within about
5 days. A second extraction phase may begin after
15 days (Soleas et al., 1998). The latter is correlated
with increased uptake of higher-molecular-weight tannins. It may also be associated with enhanced extraction
of undesirable flavorants, such as methoxypyrazines
from some cultivars (Kotseridis et al., 1999). Wines for
long aging have often been macerated on the pomace
for as long as 3 weeks. Although it results in a decline
in free anthocyanin content, color stability is augmented
by encouraging early polymerization with proanthocyanidins. However, whether the prolonged skin contact,
traditional in some parts of France and Italy, is required
for wines to age well is a moot point. Little agreement
exists among winemakers or enologists.
Although the correlation between maceration, pumping over, and wine style is well known, the ease with
which anthocyanins are extracted varies with the
cultivar. Romero-Cascales et al. (2005) promote the
idea of determining extractability and seed maturity
indices to facilitate determining the timing (and
method) of maceration. Their extractability index involves measuring anthocyanin content at two pH
valuesd3.6 and 1. Assessment of the seed maturity
index is equally important, as it markedly affects color
stability. It is obtained using a method described by
Saint-Criq et al. (1998).
An old technique influencing phenolic extraction,
and undergoing renewed interest, is cold maceration
(Feuillat, 1996). It has long been used in Burgundy but
is now being experimented with worldwide. It involves
a prefermentation maceration period (3e4 days) at cool
(15 C) to cold (4 C) temperaturesdsomewhat equivalent to the cooling that often occurred in small, unheated
Burgundian cellars at harvest time. Initiating cool
maceration with the addition of dry ice (AleixandreTudó et al., 2016a) in combination with pulsed electric
field (El Darra et al., 2013) and the addition of sulfur dioxide (Casassa et al., 2016) may be even more effective.
Where fewer proanthocyanins are desired, heating the
must at the end of the cold maceration treatment may
be desirable (Koyama et al., 2007).
The procedure has been reported to slow but facilitate
the extraction of phenolics, notably anthocyanins (GilMuñoz et al., 2009). This may be cultivar specific, as
the observation has not been consistently reported
(Casassa et al., 2016). In addition, flavor development
is reported to be more complex and intense. For
example, Heatherbell et al. (1996) note that cool maceration temperatures generated Pinot noir wines with more
of a peppery or bitter aspect, whereas cold temperatures
tended to accentuate a sweet blackberry attribute.

474

7. Fermentation

Differential flavor effects have also been noted using
Airen and Macabeo (Peinado et al., 2004). Beneficial effects have occasionally, but not consistently, been reported with cultivars as different as Pinotage,
Sangiovese, and Syrah. Some of these sensory effects
may result from influences on the must flora (Maturano
et al., 2015), possibly contributing to yeasts with higher
b-glucosidase activity (Hall et al., 2017).
However, the improved color of red wines shown
early in maturation may be short-lived. On aging, color
intensity may approach that of those employing traditional treatments (Heatherbell et al., 1996). Cold maceration has some of the same benefits as enzyme
treatment in improving color development.
A potential disadvantage of cold maceration is an
increased risk of early Brettanomyces spoilage (Renouf
et al., 2006). It also provides time for adaptation of the
indigenous grape flora. Thus, growth of Kloeckera spp.
may be enhanced when the must is warmed and
fermentation begins. This can result in a depletion of
the amino acid and micronutrient content, potentially
increasing H2S production during fermentation.
Typically, maceration occurs at ambient (warm) temperatures, extraction largely occurring by diffusion. As it increases relatively linearly with temperature, heating may
be used to speed anthocyanin uptake, limit tannin absorption (extracted more slowly), and/or inactivate the laccase
present in diseased grapes. For more details on thermovinification, see later in this chapter (“Color enhancement”).
Adding sulfur dioxide promotes anthocyanin and
phenolic extraction (Bakker et al., 1998), especially at
cooler temperatures. Sulfite-addition products are
more soluble in aqueous alcohol solutions than free anthocyanins. However, it causes anthocyanin bleaching
(reversible) and delays early anthocyaninetannin
polymerization.
Another technique for improving color (and/or flavor)
extraction is the addition of supplementary skins or seeds
and skins during fermentation (Revilla et al., 1998). The
procedure is partially based on an old Spanish technique
termed double pasta. It involves the addition of extra
pomace during fermentation. Enriching the must with
grape skins or seeds may enhance the varietal character
of the wine. The process also promotes color stabilization.
To avoid producing an excessively tannic wine due to the
increased uptake of catechins and dimeric proanthocyanidins, supplementation is usually limited to about onethird the pomace volume in the original must.
Except for cold maceration, little attention has been
given to the extraction of aromatic compounds during
skin contact. In one of the few studies on the subject,
the “berry” aspect of Cabernet Sauvignon (potentially
b-damascenone) increased during maceration, and the
less desirable canned beaneasparagus aspect (presumably methoxypyrazines) was diminished (Schmidt and

Noble, 1983). In another study, extraction of the cysteinylated precursor of 3-mercapto-1-hexanol (3 MH)
increased in Merlot and Cabernet Sauvignon in relation
to the duration of maceration (Murat et al., 2001). The
precursor is preferentially (60%) localized in skin.
Rotundone is another significant red wine odorant
known to be extracted during maceration. However,
similarly to anthocyanins, extending maceration may
eventually result in a loss of aromatics if they bind and
precipitate with yeasts and cell remnants. This again
shows the significance of frequent assessment and
experimentation by the winemaker.

Dejuicing
Dejuicers are particularly valuable when dealing with
large volumes of must. By removing most of the freerun, press capacity can be used more efficiently and
economically to extract the pressings.
Batch dejuicers consist of a columnar tank possessing
a perforated basket at one end. The mass of must forces
much of the liquid from the crushed grapes into the basket, from which it flows to a receiving tank (sump). Carbon dioxide pressure may be used to speed separation.
When drainage is complete, the basket is raised to
discharge the pomace for transport to a press.
Continuous dejuicers consist of a sloped central cylinder containing perforations that permit the juice to
escape but retain the pomace. The pomace is moved
up the cylinder by rotation of a central screw. The
dejuiced material is directly dumped into a hopper for
loading into a press. The upward flow of the crush generates the gravitational force needed to expedite juice
release. The main disadvantage of dejuicers is the additional clarification that may be required due to the
increased uptake of suspended solids.

Pressing
Presses of various designs have been used for at least
five millennia. The earliest illustrations occur in ancient
Egyptian tombs. Their initial function was simply to
facilitate separating the juice from the seeds and skins.
Only later did technological advances permit presses
to become a sophisticated tool by which winemakers
could influence wine attributes.
The earliest presses must have been both exceptionally inefficient and incredibly cumbersome to use.
Crushed grapes were placed in a cloth sac held by poles
at each end. Stylized drawings show men twisting the
poles in opposite directions. Subsequently, the “press”
was stretched by pulling on one end of the poles, while
another horizontally positioned worker pushed the

Prefermentation practices

poles apart in the center with his arms and legs (see
Darby et al., 1977).
By the Third Dynasty (2650e2575 BC), presses are
shown as being held fixed at one end while workers
twist at the other, shortening the press and bringing
the cloth taut against the crushed fruit. There seems little
if any evidence of further advancement until Classical
times. The beam-press is thought to have been developed by the Mycenaeans, possibly about 1600 BC. In
this type of press, a large beam, affixed at one end and
weighted down at the other by a heavy object, applied
pressure on grapes in a sack or other flexible porous
container. The next advance appears to have involved
the use of a screw to control the application of pressure
by the beam on grapes held in a slatted holder. It appears
to have been invented in Greece by at least the second
century BC. A wall fresco discovered in Pompeii illustrates its use in Roman times. The next advance eliminated the need for the beam, affixing the screw to a
U-shaped support, with the pressure applied to a
rounded plate positioned over the grapes in a slotted
wooden container (Forbes, 1957; White, 1984). Its advantages were discussed by Pliny the Elder (Historia Naturalis) and Vitruvius (Architectura).
The next major advance in press design seems to
have been the application of hydraulic force in the thirteenth century. It replaced muscle power associated
with a massive screw and lever action (Plate 7.1).
Incorporation of a removable bottom permitted easier
pomace discharge. Previously, presses had to be
dismantled or the pomace shoveled out at the end of
each press cycle. Both tasks were unpleasant, timeconsuming, and labor-intensive.
Increasing the drainage area involved was another
momentous development. It facilitated juice release by
increasing the surface over which pressure was applied
while reducing the flow path for fluid escape.

PLATE 7.1 Old vertical wine press in Kloster Erbach, Rheingau,
Germany. Photo courtesy R. Jackson.

475

Diminishing the force required for juice extraction also
produced juice or wine fractions of improved quality.
Placing the press on its side (horizontally) was
another astute development, again increasing the surface area for liquid escape. It permitted the length
(former height) of the press to be increased without difficulty. The horizontal orientation also permitted a section of the press to be hinged, providing access for
both convenient filling and emptying. By suspending
the press on heavy gears, the press could both be rotated
for pomace crumbling (tumbling) as well as inverted for
emptying (Plate 7.2). Crumbling breaks the compacted
pomace produced during pressing and helps entrapped
juice escape on subsequent pressings. Previously, chains
or manual mixing were used to achieve crumbling.
These had the disadvantages of potentially crushing
the seeds and increasing juice clouding (due to the
greater release of solids with the juice).
Another significant innovation was the development
of the continuous screw press. By permitting uninterrupted operation, time-consuming filling and emptying
cycles could be avoided. This is especially valuable
when large volumes of must or wine need to be pressed
in a short period. Its principal disadvantage involves an
increase in suspended solids, requiring additional fining
or clarification.
Because the free- and various press-run fractions
possess different physicochemical properties, winemakers can use these and how they are derived to influence the wine’s character. Free-run fractions are clearer
and possess lower amounts of skin-derived phenolics
and flavorants but higher suspended solids (turbidity).
Subsequently, press-run fractions contain decreasing
amounts of suspended solids but higher pigment, tannin,
and flavorant contents. Press-run fractions also are more

PLATE 7.2 Horizontal press showing chains used to crumble the
press cake (rice hulls were added to aid juice extraction for frozen
grapes in ice wine production). Photo courtesy of E. Brian Grant,
CCOVI, Brock University, St Catharines, Canada.

476

7. Fermentation

likely to oxidize (possess more polyphenol oxidase);
possess lower acidity (higher potassium contents); and
have higher concentrations of polysaccharides, gums,
and soluble proteins. Most wines are a judicious blending
of both free-run and the first press-run fractions. Depending on the intentions of the winemaker and characteristics of the grapes, a portion of the second and possibly
third pressing may be incorporated.
Not surprisingly, views vary considerably on the relative merits of using press-run fractions and the various
types of presses. Until more is known about the dynamics of flavor extraction during pressing and how to
predict its sensory consequences, the choice of press is
likely to remain based more on subjective and anecdotal
percepts than objective data.
Brief descriptions of the major types of presses are
given below. Fig. 7.9 compares the operational characteristics of equivalent volumes of wine or juice pressed in
vertical, horizontal, and pneumatic presses.
Vertical (basket) presses
Vertical presses generally consist of a series of concentrically arranged vertical slats between which the juice
can escape. Pressure is applied hydraulically from above.
The plate that presses the grapes is usually retracted
before the sides are removed to extract or crumble the
press cake. Alternatively, the bottom may be lowered.

Vertical presses are principally used with small lots of
fruit or where use of horizontal or pneumatic presses
may be impractical or uneconomic. In addition, they
have a particular advantage in the pressing of frozen
grapes, as in the production of ice wine. Breaking the
press cake is achieved by direct access.
A variant of the vertical press is what was traditionally
used in producing sparkling wine. It is much broader than
standard versions. Although relatively slow in operation,
maximizing the surface area-to-volume ratio increased its
effectiveness in pressing whole grape clusters.
Horizontal (moving head) presses
A diagrammatic representation of a horizontal press
is illustrated in Fig. 7.10. Both crushed and uncrushed
grapes as well as fermented juice can effectively be
pressed in horizontal presses.
Loading occurs through an opening in the upper
portion of the press. Pressing is conducted by hydraulically forcing end plate(s) inward from one or both
ends. The rate at which pressure is applied can be
modified to suit the needs of the grape variety and
characteristics of the press fractions desired. Fluid
escape occurs between slats of, or slits in, the pressing
cylinder. Chains and/or rotation of the press breaks
the pomace cake between successive pressings. Once

Vertical

Horizontal

Pneumatic

113 x 90

215 x 73

215 x 73

0.9
1
1.25 – 1.6
12,500 – 16,000
13.9 – 17.8

0.9
0.42
1.2
5000
5.6

0.9
4.95
0.6
29,700
33.0

113 x 18

73 x 43

215 x 239 x 3.3

long

Short

very short

100 – 120

100 – 120

50 – 90

2

1

1

3–4

2

1

Press type
Size of the basket (cm)
Volume (m3)
Pressure area (m2)
Pressure per 1 cm2 (MPa)
Pressure over the whole area (Mpa)
Pressure per 1 dm of pomace (Mpa)
Average size of the cake (cm) at one
half of the original volume

Shape of the cake

Flowing out of the must (time)
Time of one pressing (min)
Number of pressings
Total time of pressing (hr)

FIGURE 7.9 Comparison of various types of presses. From Farkas, J., 1988. Technology and Biochemistry of Wine, vols. 1 and 2. Gordon & Breach,
New York, NY, reproduced by permission.

Prefermentation practices

FIGURE 7.10

477

Diagram of the operation of a horizontal press. Courtesy of CMMC, Chalonnes-sur-Loire, France.

pressing is complete, retracting the end plate(s) and
inversion permit dumping.
The primary drawback to most vertical and horizontal presses is the progressive reduction in drainage surface during pressing. Thus, the force required to
maintain an adequate discharge rate increases during
pressing. This correspondingly increases the extraction
of suspended solids and tannins as pressing progresses. To maintain juice quality, the last portion of
the juice may need to be sacrificed. The presence of
grape stems can improve this situation. They create
channels for easier juice escape. Slower pressing is
also another option favoring juice quality. It provides
more time for juice escape (and the release of aromatics
from the skins and pulpda form of maceration under
increasing pressure).
Pneumatic (tank, bladder, or membrane) presses
Pneumatic presses avoid some of the deficiencies of
vertical and horizontal presses as well as effectively
press crushed or whole grapes and fermented must.
The press is filled through an elongated opening in
the top. Once filled and closed, the press is inverted
to allow juice or wine (free-run) to escape. Compressed
gas entering between a plastic bladder and solid outer
cylinder wall compresses the grape mass against perforated plates that project along the central cavity
(Fig. 7.11). Alternative models possess a central or

side-positioned bladder that forces the must or grapes
against a perforated outer cylinder. Presses with a central bladder tend to be more efficient in extracting juice
at lower pressures due to the must (or grapes) being
pressed more uniformly against the whole surface
area of the cylinder wall. Lower pressures exerted
over a larger surface area liberate juice more quickly
and with reduced extraction of suspended solids and
phenolics. This is often of particular concern when
extracting juice with little or minimal color, as with
white or rosé wines. Crumbling the pomace cake between successive presses is achieved by rotating the
press cylinder. Opening the filling trap and inversion
discharge the pomace.
Small, medium, and large volume (5e22 hL) versions
are commercially available. Smaller versions are of
particular value when dealing with limited quantities
of select lots of high-quality juice or wine.
Both horizontal and pneumatic presses yield highquality pressings. They are relatively low in suspended
solids, and pressing neither crushes the seeds nor extracts undue amounts of tannins. A common drawback
involves the time associated with their repeated filling
and emptying and comparatively fixed press cycle
(about 1e2 h).
A recent development has been the design of presses
extracting juice by negative (vacuum) rather than positive pressure.

FIGURE 7.11 Diagram of the operation of a pneumatic press. Note the centrally located perforated plates for drainage and the inward-moving
bladder membrane. Courtesy of Willmes.

478

7. Fermentation

Continuous screw press

Must clarification

Continuous-type presses have the advantage of
running uninterruptedly. They avoid the time and labor
costs associated with cyclical filling and emptying.
Although they work best with fermented must, they
can be adjusted to handle crushed, nonpulpy grapes.
They do not function adequately with uncrushed
grapes.
Crushed grapes as well as fermenting or fermented
must are pumped into the press via a hopper at one
end of the press (Fig. 7.12). A fixed helical screw forces
the material into the pressing chamber, whose perforated wall allows the juice or wine to escape. Pressed
pomace accumulates at the end of the pressing cylinder,
where it periodically is discharged through an exit
portal.
The primary disadvantage of the continuous press is
the poorer quality of the juice or wine liberated. For
example, the production of fruit esters during fermentation tends to be lower in juice derived from continuous screw presses. This is particularly noticeable in
older models, in which separation of different press
fractions was impossible. Newer models permit such
a separation. The first fractions (closest to the intake)
possess characteristics similar to free-run fractions.
Fractions obtained approaching the end of the pressing
cylinder progressively resemble the first, second, and
third pressings of conventional presses. Slower pressing rates decrease the incorporation of suspended
solids that diminish juice or wine quality but also
reduce one of the principal advantages of continuoustype presses, namely speed.
Pressing aids, such as cellulose and rice hulls (Plate
7.2), may be added to improve extraction. The use of
such preparations can increase free-run yields by up to
5%e15%. Occasionally, however, their addition may influence subsequent fragrance development. In addition,
pectinases may be added to facilitate juice released
especially with slip-skin (V. labrusca) or other pulpy cultivars. Pectinase also eases filtering and improves clarity.

For white wine production, the juice is clarified before
fermentation, partially to favor the retention of a fruity
character. It could be masked by production of fusel alcohols associated with juice containing high levels of
suspended solids. The largest particles seem particularly
active in inducing fusel alcohol synthesis (Klingshirn
et al., 1987). High levels of suspended solids have also
been reported to increase hydrogen sulfide production
(Singleton et al., 1975). In addition, much of the remaining polyphenol oxidase activity is associated with this
fraction. Thus, early removal is desired to limit excessive
enzyme-catalyzed oxidation.
Although large amounts of suspended solids are undesirable, excessive clarification is equally inappropriate.
Filtration and centrifugation can remove more than 90%
of the fatty acids from the must (Bertrand and Miele,
1984) as well as much of its sterol content (Delfini et al.,
1993). This loss can slow alcoholic fermentation; retard
malolactic fermentation; diminish yeast viability; and
provoke excessive acetic acid production during alcoholic fermentation (Fig. 7.13). The last of these favors
the formation of ethyl acetate, which has a much lower
sensory threshold than acetic acid. Part of this tendency
relates to polyphenol removal as well as unsaturated
fatty acids that can limit yeast synthesis and the release
of acetic acid (Delfini et al., 1992).

1

Pnc
Pn
Fnc
Fc

ACETIC ACID g/L

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

DAYS

FIGURE 7.12 Schematic representation of a continuous press with
hydraulic control. Courtesy of Diemme.

FIGURE 7.13 Acetic acid production by yeasts in free- (F) and
press-run (P) grape juice, with (c) or without clarification (nc). From
Delfini, C., Cervetti, F., 1991. Metabolic and technological factors affecting
acetic acid production by yeasts during alcoholic fermentation. Wein-Wiss
46, 142e150.

Prefermentation practices

In addition to influencing juice nutrient status, clarification procedures can variably reduce the indigenous
microbial population derived from grapes. Both features
can influence the dynamics of yeast growth and the
number and types of species/strains that develop, not
only in spontaneous but also in induced fermentation
(Mora and Mulet, 1991).
Because suspended solids favor early malolactic
fermentation, retention of small amounts can be beneficial in this regard. Concentrations between 0.1% and
0.5% seem desirable for several white wines (Groat
and Ough, 1978). Nicolini et al. (2011) found similar results but noted that yeast strain had more influence on
wine flavor than turbidity within the normal range. Suspended solids are usually measured in turbidity units,
for which appropriate values range between 50e150
and 100e250 NTU (nephelometric turbidity units)
depending on wine color, cultivar, and winemaker intentions. Within the range noted, juice fermentation usually goes to completion and is associated with synthesis
of desirable fruit esters and higher alcohols. The precise
reasons for these varied influences are poorly understood but may involve factors such as the adsorption
of toxic carboxylic acids produced during fermentation;
release of grape lipids (precursors for yeast cell membranes); and increased availability (concentration) of
essential minerals and other nutrients adhering to the
particulate matter. The colloidal content of the juice is
also inversely related to the production and release of
extracellular macromolecules during the early stages
of fermentation, notably mannoproteins (GuillouxBenatier et al., 1995).
White juice is frequently allowed to settle spontaneously for several hours (12e24 h). Settling is usually at
cool temperatures (5e15 C), again depending on the
preferences of the winemaker. Settling at the lower end
of the temperature range is associated with the extraction of fewer flavonoids and more effectively limits
any indigenous microbial activity. Nonetheless, it takes
longer and retards the activity of enzyme additives. Particulate settling is primarily a function of size and the
distance traveled for deposition. Butzke (2010) notes
that larger particles, such as sections of grape skin
(w100 mm), fall at about 1 m/15 min, whereas yeast cells
(10 mm) settle at about 1 m/24 h.
Bentonite or potassium caseinate may be added to
facilitate settling and subsequent protein stability. If
used, bentonite is added after an initial period of spontaneous settling. This minimizes production of a voluminous loose sediment and the associated loss of
juice. Occasionally, a portion of the precipitate may be
left with the juice during alcoholic fermentation. This
has been interpreted as permitting vital nutrients to
remain available (e.g., sterols and unsaturated fatty
acids).

479

Although bentonite is the most commonly used clarifying agent, its effects on wine quality remain contentious (Groat and Ough, 1978; Weiss and Bisson, 2002).
Part of this may relate to extensive variation in the
timing and rate of application, vintage conditions,
and cultivar specificity. In addition, the removal of
important fatty acids, such as palmitic, oleic, linoleic,
and linolenic acid as well as squalene, stigmastanol,
and b-sitosterol, is difficult to predict or control. Controversy about accelerated clarification also applies to
alternative treatments (Moio et al., 2004; Armada and
Falqué, 2007).
Other aspects that may influence the outcome of clarification include the removal of amino acids by
bentonite. This could influence their involvement in flavor development, notably higher alcohol synthesis and
their various esters. In contrast, potassium caseinate
tends to remove primarily polyphenolics.
Another alternative clarification technique is centrifugation. Because particles are removed based on size
(mass), centrifugation can be adjusted as seems appropriate to limit its effect on juice chemistry. Although
centrifuges are expensive, minimal juice loss and speed
have made them particularly popular. In contrast, an
alternate technique, termed vacuum filtration, tends
to remove solids excessively, resulting in longer
fermentation times and generating more volatile acidity (Ferrando et al., 1998). Diatomaceous earth may be
added as a filter aid in some forms of prefermentative
clarification.
Flotation is another clarification technique (Ferrarini
et al., 1995). It involves the implosion of microbubbles
of gas (air, nitrogen, or oxygen) into the juice under pressure (5e6 ATM). As the gas rises to the surface, suspended solids adhere to the bubble surface. Adherence
may be assisted by the addition of adjuvants, such as
gelatin or bentonite. The flocculated solids are subsequently skimmed off. The procedure has several advantages, relative to other clarification techniques, notably
better control over the degree of clarification as well as
limited fatty acid removal (Cocito and Delfini, 1997).
In addition, clarification can be achieved in less time
and at ambient temperatures (avoiding the typical
refrigeration associated with static settling). The technique also permits simultaneous hyperoxygenation if
desired. In addition, it can be used as a pretreatment
to improve the efficiency of procedures such as crossflow filtration.

Adjustments to juice and must
Acidity and pH
Juice and must that lack the desired acidity or are
too high in pH ideally should be adjusted before

480

7. Fermentation

fermentation. Acidification at this time has the benefit of
limiting microbial spoilage and favoring better flavor
development. In addition, postfermentative acidification
is illegal in some jurisdictions. Acidification may be
required, especially in warm to hot viticultural regions,
due to extensive malic acid degradation near the end of
grape maturation.
In contrast, deacidification typically occurs after
fermentation. At this point, fermentative changes in
wine acidity are complete. Deacidification can thus be
based on actual rather than predicted need. In addition,
postfermentative deacidification may be delayed until
spring, when other winery activities are less exigent.
No precise recommendations for optimum acidity or
pH values are possible. “Ideal” values are too dependent
on wine style and winemaker preferences. Nevertheless,
the acceptable range for total acidity in most wines generally falls between 5.5 and 8.5 mg/L. White wines are
generally preferred at the higher end of the scale, whereas
red wines are more appreciated at the lower end. For pH, a
range between 3.1 and 3.4 is generally preferred for white
wines, and between 3.3 and 3.6 for most red wines. Somewhat lower values are usually desired in the juice or must
because pH often increases slightly during or after fermentation (frequently as a result of tartrate crystallization).
Adequate acidity not only is important for generating a
clean fresh taste and favoring color stability but also is central to optimal aging and limiting microbial spoilage.
One of the oldest pH adjustment procedures is
plastering (Illustration 7.1). On addition, gypsum
(CaSO4$2H2O) converts some of the potassium bitartrate to the free acid form
This ancient form of acidification is rarely, if ever,
used today due to undesirably increasing the wine’s sulfur and calcium contents. In addition, organic acids for
acidification are readily available, are relatively inexpensive, and do not similarly disrupt wine chemistry.
The high pH associated with low total acidity is most
simply corrected by direct acidificationdthe addition of
organic acids (Buechsenstein and Ough, 1979). Tartaric
acid is typically used because of its relative insensitivity
to microbial decomposition. It also has the advantage of
being a natural wine constituent. It decreases the pH by

ILLUSTRATION 7.1

inducing the precipitation of excess potassium (as a
bitartrate salt). Another alternative is lactic acid. It not
only increases the wine’s fresh acidic taste but is also
considered by some to enhance the perception of
“body.” Although citric acid may be substituted (it
also facilitates iron stabilization), it is susceptible to microbial degradation by lactic acid bacteria. This could
lead to undesirably high concentrations of diacetyl.
Cases of excessive acidity may be rectified by
blending in juice of lower acidity (where available).
Alternatively, some of the acid may be neutralized
with calcium carbonate, potassium carbonate, or
Acidex. If calcium carbonate is used, it is usually added
before malolactic fermentation to limit the production of
significant quantities of calcium lactatedwhich can
generate a bitter taste (Lawless et al., 2003).
The most difficult situation occurs when the juice
shows both high total acidity and high pH. This seeming
anomaly is particularly common in cool climatic regions,
where grapes may possess both high malic acid and
high potassium content. Nagel et al. (1988) suggest adding tartaric acid to adjust the malic/tartaric ratio to
unity. This is followed by precipitation of the excess potassium by Acidex. Subsequent addition of tartaric acid
can provide both desirable acidity and pH.
Amelioration achieves deacidification by dilution with
water. Because it simultaneously reduces the sugar content, the addition of sugar is required to readjust the  Brix.
Although amelioration is illegal in most countries, it has
the property of having little effect on juice pH. This results
from the dicarboxylic nature of tartaric acid and its low
dissociation constant. The dilution of Hþ, which results
from the addition of water, is counterbalanced by increased
dissociation of tartaric acid. Thus, total acidity falls, but the
pH is only marginally affected. Although reduced color,
body, and flavor may be consequences of amelioration,
these effects may actually be desirable in intensely flavored
varieties. Nevertheless, the greatest disadvantage of
amelioration is consumer image. The addition of sugar,
and especially water, is commonly viewed by connoisseurs
as unprofessional if not unscrupulous.
Postfermentation adjustments to acidity and pH are
discussed in Chapter 8.

The chemistry of wine plastering.

Prefermentation practices

Sugar content and alcohol potential
Sugar content is usually assessed with a hydrometer at
the beginning of fermentation. It provides a quick-andeasy method of assessing specific gravity, an indicator
of total soluble solids and sugar content (at values above
18  Brix) (Crippen and Morrison, 1986). In the United
States, these units are measured in  Brix, whereas in
Europe, the units are usually measured as Balling,
Baumé, or Oechsle (Appendix 6.1). More precise measurements are available, but hydrometer determinations
are sufficiently precise early in the winemaking process.
In the field, refractometer readings are used to measure
juice sugar content.
As fermentation progresses, hydrometer readings
become increasingly imprecise measures of sugar content.
This results from alcohol’s effect on specific gravity readings. Nevertheless, specific gravity can still be used to
adequately indicate the termination of fermentation in
dry table wines. For sweet fortified wines, correction tables
are necessary for this purpose (Amerine and Ough, 1980).
Following the completion of fermentation, a precise
chemical analysis of the wine’s residual sugar content
is usually required (Zoecklein et al., 1995). Even small
amounts of residual fermentable sugars can affect microbial stability and therefore how the wine should be
treated up to and including bottling.
If the sugar content of the must is insufficient to
generate the desired alcohol content, chaptalization
may be employed. This involves the addition of a
concentrated sugar solution. It was advocated in 1801
by Dr. Chaptal as a means of improving the stability
and character of wines produced from immature or
rain-swollen grapes. The increased fermentative capacity of the juice not only increases the alcohol content
but also extends the fermentation process, modifying
and improving the wine’s fragrance. Although honey
or concentrated grape juice has been added to wine since
ancient Greek and Roman times (to increase sweetness),
adding these before fermentation is not mentioned. The
connection between alcoholic strength and sugar content was noted by the end of the 1600s (Houghton,
1699e1700), but its relevance to winemaking seemingly
was unrecognized until much later.
Chaptalization is typically illegal in regions or countries where warm growing conditions obviate its need
but is usually permissible where cool climates may limit
full grape ripening. Nonetheless, even where legitimate,
chaptalization is permissible only with specific governmental approval.
Although many factors influence the conversion of
sugar to alcohol (Jones and Ough, 1985), 17 g sucrose
typically yields about 10 g ethanol. For chaptalization,
the sugar is first dissolved in grape juice and added
near the end of the exponential phase of yeast growth

481

(about 2e4 days after the commencement of active
fermentation) (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 1987). By this
time, yeast multiplication is essentially complete, and
the sugar does not disrupt fermentation. The disaccharide sucrose is quickly converted into equimolar amounts
of glucose and fructose. Concurrent aeration of the fermenting juice or must is typically recommended.
In addition to elevating the alcohol content, chaptalization slightly augments the production of certain
compoundsdfor example glycerol, succinic acid, and
2,3-butanediol (see Figs. 7.22 and 7.23). The synthesis
of some aromatically important esters may also be
increased, whereas others are decreased (see Fig. 7.39).
In some varietal wines, such as Riesling, chaptalization
can diminish the green or unripe taste derived from
immature fruit (Bach and Hess, 1986). However, these
influences cannot compensate for the lack of varietal
character found in immature grapes or those engorged
by rains.
Another technique used to improve the character of
wines produced in poor vintages, without the addition
of sugar, is reverse osmosis (Duitschaever et al., 1991).
Although first designed as a means of obtaining freshwater from seawater, reverse osmosis has found many
applications in other industries from sewage treatment
to fruit-juice concentration. It is the latter application
that attracted the attention of enologists. In addition
to offsetting problems, such as juice dilution associated
with preharvest rains, reverse osmosis can concentrate
fruit flavors. Reverse osmosis operates by forcing water
out of the juice through a membrane that retains most
of the sugars, nutrients, and flavorants. Regrettably,
membranes are not fully impermeable to varietal aromatics. Thus, important aroma components may be
lost (Mietton-Peuchot et al., 2002). Small, highly volatile
water-soluble compounds, such as esters and aldehydes, are the most likely to be lost. Thankfully, most
of these are fermentation by-products produced after
treatment. Any varietal character loss has the potential
of being rectified by the addition of untreated juice.
Concentration of volatiles removed with the water
and their reintroduction into the treated juice constitute
another option. Development of filters with improved
selective permeability may eliminate this issue.
Another potential problem is augmentation in total
acidity, but where marked, it can be rectified with
deacidification.
Cryoextraction is an alternative technique that can
overcome deficiencies in sugar and flavor content
(Chauvet et al., 1986). As with reverse osmosis, cryoextraction can be used with immature grapes or berries
swollen with water after rains. It may also be used to
augment the sugar and flavor content of grapes in the
production of sweet table wines. Cryoextraction is the
technical equivalent of ice wine production, except

482

7. Fermentation

that overmature grapes are not used. Cryoextraction involves freezing the grapes and their subsequent pressing while frozen. As water in the grapes freezes,
dissolved substances become increasingly concentrated
in the remaining liquid. Because berries of greater maturity (and thus greater sugar content) freeze more slowly
than immature grapes, cryoextraction tends to favor
juice concentration in immature grapes. Although temperatures down to 15 C increase solute concentration,
temperatures between 5 and 10 C are generally sufficient to remove unwanted water (which remains as ice
with the pomace after pressing). Cryoextraction appears
not to produce undesirable sensory consequences. Probably its most significant limitation is the cost/benefit ratio, especially if the equipment is needed rarely. The
same limitation also applies to the Entropie concentrator. This is another juice concentration procedure
that uses vacuum but at ambient temperatures
(w20 C) (Froment, 1991).
Reducing alcohol content
Although sugar adjustment is usually designed to
increase  Brix, there is also a growing market for lowalcohol wines. Reduced alcohol content is usually generated by some form of dealcoholization following the
completion of fermentation (see Dealcoholization, Chapter 8). However, the joint action of glucose oxidase and
peroxidase can diminish the capacity of juice to support
ethanol production. Glucose oxidase converts glucose to
gluconic acid, a nutrient that yeasts cannot ferment.
Hydrogen peroxide, produced as a by-product of
glucose oxidation, is converted to water by peroxidase.
Two reactions are involved (Illustration 7.2)
With glucose oxidase, alcohol production can be
reduced by about 50%, equivalent to the juice glucose
content. Thus, ethanol production is dependent on the
remaining fructose. Because of the oxygen required,
the juice becomes oxidized and turns brown. Although
most oxidized compounds precipitate during fermentation, the wine is still left with a distinct golden tint. The
generally undesirable sensory aspects of this process are
discussed in work by Pickering et al. (1999). Nonetheless, limited use (to slightly reduce the alcohol-

ILLUSTRATION 7.2 The reactions involved in the use of
glucose oxidase and peroxidase to reduce the ethanol potential of
grape juice.

producing potential of high  Brix red musts) may be
beneficial (Biyela et al., 2009). The degree of oxygen
involved can resemble that used in hyperoxidation.
This could offset modern tendencies of harvesting
grapes later in the belief that this achieves higher flavor
and coloration.
Alternatively, particular Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strains can divert more fermentation by-products to
compounds, such as glycerol, rather than alcohol
(Kutyna et al., 2010). This could also be useful in generating a smoother mouthfeel. However, a potential disadvantage of the excess NADþ generated in glycerol
synthesis is the increased likelihood of acetaldehyde being oxidized as acetic acid. Although this might be minimized by using a strain of yeast deficient in aldehyde
dehydrogenase, it would result in an undesirable increase in acetaldehyde content. Adjusting a metabolic
pathway to solve one problem may unexpectedly
generate others (Varela et al., 2012). Alternatively, the
use of non-Saccharomyces yeasts (e.g., Candida zemplinina
and Metschnikowia pulcherrima), either alone (Quirós
et al., 2014) or in combination with S. cerevisiae (Contreras et al., 2015), can limit ethanol production. This requires limited aeration to favor respiratory metabolism.
In a novel approach, unripe grapes (harvested during
cluster thinning) are fermented to produce a low-alcohol,
acidic wine (Kontoudakis et al., 2011)dsomewhat equivalent to producing a verjus. The wine is treated with
bentonite and charcoal to produce a flavorless wine that
is added to wine made later from fully ripened grapes.
It increases the wine’s acidity while reducing its alcohol
content. The resultant blend has a more moderate (traditional) alcohol content, and the acidity enhances color intensity and freshness. The procedure apparently does not
negatively affect fragrance. To date, trials have involved
Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, and Bobal as well as Verdelho and Petit Verdot grapes (Longo et al., 2018).
Another alternative, now permissible in some jurisdictions, is diluting the juice/must with water. It is used to
compensate for the juice concentration that results from
grape shriveling (Schelezki et al., 2018). The process
seemingly does not negatively affect the wine’s sensory
attributes (Bindon et al., 2014).
Other procedures under investigation involve vacuum distillation or stripping with carbon dioxide
halfway through fermentation (Aguera et al., 2010).
Both can reduce alcohol content by a moderate amount
(w2%). Although seemingly a stress for the yeasts,
fermentation came to completion normally. The reduction in alcohol content had only minor influences on
the wine’s sensory attributes. Another approach is to
directly reduce the sugar content of the must via its selective removal with nanofiltration (Mihnea et al., 2012).

483

Prefermentation practices

Color enhancement
Cultivars such as Pinot noir rarely produce dark red
wines. This is exacerbated by standard vinification procedures that may extract little more than 30% of a
grape’s anthocyanin content. Most anthocyanins remain
with the pomace or precipitate with cellular remains in
the lees.
Where poor coloration is typical, several techniques
may enhance anthocyanin extraction and/or color
development. Some have already been noted (cold
maceration, pressing variations, saignée) or are discussed later (enzyme addition, various pumping-over
options, choice of yeast strain, or the addition of enologic tannins). In many instances, their relative benefits
depend on whether deficiencies involve copigmentation
cofactors or the extraction of flavonoids active in polymeric pigment formation.
Thermovinification refers to a range of procedures
where grapes (or must) are heated prior to fermentation.
Alternatively, heating may occur at the end of fermentation, before pressing, as occasionally done with several
cultivars in southern France.
Thermovinification is primarily used to enhance the
extraction of anthocyanins in cultivars relatively low in
their content (Fig. 7.14) or with diseased grapes (contaminated laccases). Rapid (a few seconds) heating to between 50 and 80 C inactivates these enzymes. With
moderate Botrytis infection, red grapes need to be heated
to above 60 C.
Other versions of thermovinification entail exposing
whole grapes to steam or boiling water (flash heating).
Such treatments are typically short in duration
(w1 min) and heat only the outer pigment-containing
layers of the fruit to w80 C. This inactivates phenol oxidases and kills skin cells, facilitating the quick release of
anthocyanins during subsequent maceration (w45 C for
6e10 h). Other versions consist of heating some or all of

the pomace or both the pomace and the juice. The juice
and pomace are typically rapidly heated (in a tubular
heat exchanger) to between 55 and 70 C. Heating may
occur with or without continuous stirring.
A more recent variation, termed flash détente (Price,
2013; Sebastian and Nadeau, 2002), involves short heating at 80e85 C. The must is then piped to a vacuum flash
cooling system, where the temperature rapidly drops
30e32 C. This causes cell rupture, favoring anthocyanin
extraction, without the potential flavor modifications
that may accompany conventional thermovinification.
Maceration times vary inversely with the temperature (the higher the temperature, the shorter the duration) (Wiederkehr, 1997) and the desires of the
winemaker. If treatment is likely to damage subtle varietal aromas, temperatures as low as 50 C may be used.
For especially delicate varieties, such as Pinot noir, heating may be as low as 32 C for 12 h (Cuénat et al., 1991).
Subsequent vinification may be conducted in the presence or absence of the seeds and skins. Alternately, the
must may be pressed immediately after heating (leading
to the term “hot pressing”). The juice is then cooled to an
appropriate temperature and fermentation initiated.
Each variation influences the wine attributes generated.
Possibly because thermovinification has little effect
on tannin extraction, the procedure is also useful in producing wines for early consumption. In addition to
generating a rich color, thermovinification improves
juice fermentability (both alcoholic and malolactic); produces wines low in astringency; reduces vegetal odors;
and may enhance fruit flavor development. Certain varietal aromas, such as those from Vitis labrusca cultivars,
tend to be diminished and made more acceptable to consumers habituated to European wines. In addition, it
may reduce the vegetative, grassy aromas that may
mar wines made from some red FrencheAmerican hybrids. The procedure allows the natural fruity fragrances
of most grapes to express themselves. This has led to a

Trad - AC
Thermo - AC
Trad - OD
Thermo - OD

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

.5

1

2

3

4

Duration of alcoholic fermentation (days)

5

6

0.0

Anthocyanin content (g/l)

Color intensity (OD)

1.0

0.0

FIGURE 7.14

1.2

1.2

Development of color intensity (OD) and level of anthocyanins (mg/L)
during fermentation. AC, anthocyanin content;
OD, optical density; Thermo, thermovinification;
Trad, traditional fermentation. Fermentation
ended after 5 days with a traditional fermentation and 3 days for thermovification. Regraphed
from data in Ribéreau-Gayon, J., Peynaud, E.,
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Sudraud, P., 1976. Traité
d’Oenologie, Sciences et Techniques du Vin, vol. 3.
Dunod, Paris.

484

7. Fermentation

trend in the eastern United States of blending red wines
fermented traditionally with those derived from thermovinified musts.
The rapid fermentation that follows thermovinification has several benefits including the efficient use of
fermentor capacity. However, the associated rapid heat
buildup increases the need for effective fermentortemperature control.
Occasionally, thermovinification generates undesirable bluish colors and cooked flavors. These usually
can be avoided by adjustments, such as strict exclusion
of oxygen and keeping the duration of heating as short
as possible. Surprisingly, thermovinification provides a
richer red color (less blue) with red FrencheAmerican
hybrids. Difficulties with clarification and filtering may
also be experienced with thermovinification due to the
denaturation of grape pectinases. This can be corrected
by posttreatment addition of pectinase.
An alternative to thermovinification is a pulsed electric field (PEF), where millisecond, high-voltage
(10e60 kV) pulses are applied at the onset of maceration. It disrupts cell membranes, favoring the release of
cellular constituents. It is particularly useful in liberating
phenolic compounds, notably anthocyanins (Plate 7.3).
As such, the need for extended fermentative maceration
is reduced as well as the expense associated with thermovinification or enzyme treatments. For example,
PEF increased the release of anthocyanins from Aglianico grapes by more than 75%, whereas polyphenolic
content was increased by about 20% (Donsi et al.,
2010). However, the same treatment had little effect on
anthocyanin release from Piedirosso grapes. Differential
varietal effectiveness has been found with other cultivars (Lopez et al., 2008). PEF may be most useful with
cultivars where extraction is the most difficult. A
distinctly different use for PEF is nonthermal microbial
sterilization. For this, considerably higher voltages are
required. For a review see Puértolas et al. (2010).

Accentuated cut edges is another new technique
designed to enhance anthocyanin extraction. It was
initially developed to enhance the color depth and stability of Pinot noir wines (a cultivar with thin skins,
low pigment content, and limited color stability). The
process involves increasing the number (by reducing
the size) of skin particles relative to that generated during crushing (Sparrow et al., 2016a). Correspondingly,
the surface area over which anthocyanins can escape is
increased. By facilitating anthocyanin extraction, earlier
pressing is possible, limiting the uptake of bitter, astringent tannins while still favoring the release of sufficient
skin tannins to stabilize the wine’s color. The technique
also marginally enhances the wine’s fruity character
(Sparrow et al., 2016b).
Red wines are often treated to microoxidation (see
Chapter 8) to enhance color stability. Its rationale is
based on the production of acetaldehyde and its promotion of tannineanthocyanin polymerization. Nonetheless, this can equally result in undesirable oxidative
reactions and the activation of microbial contaminants.
An alternative suggestion is the direct addition of acetaldehyde to fermenting must. Its addition also can result
in reduced astringency and other sensory attributes
(Aleixandre-Tudo et al., 2016b). Some of these benefits
are equally achieved with the slow oxygen uptake of
oak barrels (Sheridan and Elias, 2015).
Enzyme addition
Advancements in microbiology and chemical purification have permitted the isolation of enzymes in commercial quantities. Their use is now commonplace in
many industries including wine production. Filamentous fungi, notably Aspergillus and Trichoderma spp.,
are the primary sources of those authorized for wine
use. They have the advantage of being active within
the pH range and SO2 conditions found in wine.

PLATE 7.3 Visual aspect of the Garnacha must after 1 h of maceration with grapes untreated and treated by PEF (50 exponential decay pulses;
1e7 kV/cm; 0.4e4.1 kJ/kg. Photo courtesy Dr. Raso; reprinted from Puértolas, E., López, N., Condón, S., Álvarez, I., and Raso, J., 2010. Potential applications of PEF to improve red wine quality. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 21, 247e255., with permission from Elsevier.

485

Prefermentation practices

Enzyme preparations may be added to facilitate the
release of free-run juice; aid wine clarification, filtration,
decoloration, and dealcoholization; enhance flavor development; or augment anthocyanin liberation. Regrettably,
most commercial enzyme preparations are not fully purified (Fig. 7.15), possessing collateral enzymic activities. In
addition, isozymic forms have different pH and temperature optima. Consequently, their effects can vary
depending on the supplier, wine composition, and temperature. This can occasionally result in unanticipated
or undesired effects (Fia et al., 2016). As usual, it is judicious to conduct small trials with any new product to
ascertain its effects under local conditions. This situation
has been partially simplified with a comparative study of
the enzymic properties of many preparations (Guérin
et al., 2009). For additional details see Ugliano (2010)
and O’Kennedy and Canal-Llaubères (2013a, b).
Most wine grapes lose their pulpy texture and
become juicy as they ripen. In some situations, though,
juice extraction is improved by the addition of

commercial pectolytic enzyme preparations. Most are
derived from Aspergillus (usually A. niger). Polygalacturonase preparations are particularly valuable with slipskin (Vitis labrusca) cultivars. They may also be useful
if added after pressing to improve juice clarity and filterability. Degrading colloidal pectins limits their tendency
to clog filters. In addition, degraded pectins possess
more negatively charged sites, facilitating their association with positively charged suspended particles. As
the complexes possess greater mass and are less hydrophilic, they are more likely to precipitate spontaneously,
thereby minimizing clarification issues.
Special pectolytic preparations are also available to
assist color and flavor release (Wightman et al., 1997;
Revilla and González-San José, 2003) or limit the astringency of red wines (Ducasse et al., 2010). These actions
partially relate to their macerating influence (inducing
cell death and tissue disintegration). The benefit is often
variety specific and primarily useful with lightly colored
red or slip-skin cultivars. In the former, the principal

(A)

PME
PL *5
PG
Galactanase
Xylanase
Glucanase

40000

nkat/g/preparation

35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0

(B)

Color
extraction

Clarification

Pressing Sedimentation Polyvalent

40000
35000

PME *3
PL *3
PG
Galactanase
Glucanase

30000
nkat/g/preparation

Aroma
release

25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
AR34

AR35

AR36

AR37

AR38

AR39

AR40

AR41

FIGURE 7.15 Pectolytic (pectin methyl
esterase [PME], polygalacturonase [PG], and
pectin lyase [PL]), cellulolytic (glucanase), and
hemicellulolytic (galactanase and xylanase)
activities (expressed in nanokatal/g preparation) of (A) 41 commercial enzyme preparations, sorted by technological interest, and
(B) aroma release (AR) preparations
(1 nkat ¼ 1 nmol/s enzymatic reaction product). From Guérin, L., Sutter, D.-H., Demois, A.,
Chereau, M., Trandafir, G., 2009. Determination of
activity profiles of the main commercial enzyme
preparations used in winemaking. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 60, 322e331, reproduced with paid permission, conveyed through the Copyright Clearance
Center.

486

7. Fermentation

benefit may accrue from the release of additional colorstabilizing phenolics (Bucelli et al., 2006); in the latter,
degradation of pectins facilitates anthocyanin liberation.
Although commercial pectinase preparations primarily contain pectin lyase, they often possess additional
enzymic attributes. Pectin lyase degrades methylated
pectins (releasing methanol), whereas preparations
with polygalacturonase and pectin methyl esterase
activities release less methanol (Revilla and GonzálezSan José, 1998). Additional actions (such as hemicellulase activity) may be incorporated to further assist color
extraction and filterability.
In addition, preparations may possess b-glucanase
activities. They typically come from Trichoderma harzianum. These are generally designed to enhance juice or
wine clarificationdespecially with grapes possessing
significant amounts of viscous glucans (e.g., due to
Botrytis infection). In this situation, the enzyme preparation is best applied immediately after juice release before
phenolic extraction and subsequent ethanol accumulation can disrupt enzymic activity (Zinnai et al., 2010).
Other glucanase preparations may be used after fermentation to promote earlier yeast autolysis, releasing mannoproteins and other cellular constituents.
Most preparations now possess little cinnamoyl (cinnamyl) esterase activity. Cinnamoyl esterase breaks the
bonding between hydroxycinnamates and tartaric acid
(notably caffeoyl tartrate, but also fertaric acid). Deesterification converts hydroxycinnamates into forms decarboxylated to vinylphenols by many strains of
Brettanomyces. Some strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
can also deesterify hydroxycinnamates. At abovethreshold values, vinylphenols can generate an
undesirable phenolic odor (Chatonnet et al., 1992).
More significantly, further metabolism by Brettanomyces
generates barnyard-like ethyl phenols. This is primarily
a problem with red winesdtheir being more frequently
contaminated with Brettanomyces due to maturation in
oak. One potential benefit, though (in the absence of
Brettanomyces) is the polymerization between vinylphenols and anthocyanins (Morata et al., 2007). Vinyl pyranoanthocyanins are much more resistant than free
anthocyanins to oxidation and sulfur dioxide
decoloration.
Some pectinase preparations possess b-glycosidase activity, effective in releasing aromatics glycosidically
bound in nonvolatile sugar complexes. Glycosidic linkages rupture naturally under acidic conditions (Mateo
and Jimenez, 2000). However, this is slow, and heating
to speed the process induces flavor damage. Thus, most
attention has been directed toward enzymatic hydrolysis,
especially white wines designed for early consumption.
Addition occurs at the end of fermentation, because
sugars in the juice inhibit their catalytic action (CanalLlaubères, 1993). Although liberating free terpenes and

norisoprenoids may be desirable, this does not apply to
volatile phenols. Thus, b-glycosidase preparations may
not be desirable, notably for red musts (Lao et al., 1997).
Of enzyme preparations, b-glucosidases have been
the most studied, even though preparations containing
activities affecting a-arabinosides, a-rhamnosides,
b-xylanosides, and b-apiosides improve their effectiveness. This results from flavorants being occasionally
bound to sugars other than glucose. These sugars may
need to be removed before glucosidase can have its effect. Thus, preparations intended to enhance flavor
release should be assessed in trials. Accentuated aroma
release may disrupt the wine’s traditional characteristics
(e.g., Sauvignon blanc and Chardonnay) or sacrifice aging potential (the slow release of aromatics can replace
or compensate for those that oxidize or escape via the
closure during aging).
Inactivation of most enzyme preparations can be
achieved by the addition of agents such as bentonite. Nonetheless, immobilization on plates, and regulating the rate of
wine passage over these plates, has the greatest potential to
modulate enzymatic activity (Caldini et al., 1994).
Considerable concern was aroused several years ago
when it was discovered that wines, especially those
that were heated during processing, possessed a suspected carcinogendethyl carbamate (urethane). Ethyl
carbamate can also form spontaneously as a reaction
by-product between ethanol and urea. Urea can occur
in wine as a result of arginine metabolism; be supplied
directly as nitrogen supplement during fermentation;
or be a residue from its uptake by roots following vineyard fertilization. Urea presence can be influenced by
the choice of yeast strain (Dahabieh et al., 2009); by
avoiding urea addition during fermentation; or by the
addition of urease (Ough and Trioli, 1988).
One of the major developments in enzyme application
involves immobilization on or within an inert support.
This limits activity to only the time and portion of wine
passing across (or through) the support. The technique
has several distinct advantages. It permits better control
over the degree of modification; increases use efficiency;
and avoids adding protein to the wine (possibly complicating protein stability). Although more costly, the advantages may outweigh the cost differential.
Other adjustments
The addition of nitrogen (typically ammonium salts)
and vitamins is usually unnecessary but can significantly
improve the fermentability of botrytized and highly clarified white juice. When required, addition is more effective when supplied periodically rather than in a single
dose at the onset of fermentation. Nitrogen is often supplied as diammonium phosphate (DAP) or ammonium
hydrogen phosphate. Addition beyond established
need can undesirably enhance phosphate contents and

Prefermentation practices

off-odor production (see Vilanova et al., 2015). Nitrogen
addition is rarely of needed with red wines, as adequate
supplies are available from the pomace.
Other additions may include yeast extract (to favor
malolactic fermentation) and tannins (to must from red
grapes low in phenolic content) (Alcalde-Eon et al., 2014).
Blending
In white wine production, it is common to combine
free-run juice with the first pressing. Occasionally, the
second pressing may also be added. Other pressings
usually are too tannic and complicate clarification to
justify their use. However, where warranted, several
finings and centrifugations can permit their incorporation with the other fractions. Alternatively,
late pressings and the pomace may be fermented to
obtain alcohol for distillation or used in vinegar
production.
For grape varieties such as Riesling, pressings may
contain two to five times the concentration of terpenes
found in the free-run juice (Marais and van Wyk,
1986). Because of their importance to the distinctive
aroma of certain cultivars, the addition of pressings
may enhance wine quality. The distribution of individual monoterpenes within the fruit varies with the
cultivar, grape maturity, and the relative amounts of
free and bound terpenes (Park et al., 1991). Thus, the
addition of pressings may affect both the quantitative
and qualitative aspects of a wine’s aroma. Their use
has some of the same benefits as maceration but offers
the winemaker greater control.
For red wines, blending usually occurs at the end of
fermentation. However, when it occurs prior to fermentation, it usually involves must from grapes derived
from different sites or vineyards. Occasionally, though,
it may involve must from several red varieties (a procedure termed mixed winemaking or co-winemaking).
Although uncommon, it can enhance copigmentation
and color stability (Lorenzo et al., 2005). The procedure
may also result in flavor synergy (Garcı́a-Carpintero
et al., 2010). Occasionally, even the juice or pomace
from white grapes may be added (to supply additional
copigments) (Gordillo et al., 2014).
Decoloration and reducing browning potential
Although most white wines come from white grapes,
some clones of “white” grapes, such as Gewürztraminer,
synthesize small amounts of anthocyanins in their skins.
In addition, as most cultivars possess colorless juice,
even red cultivars can be used to produce white wines.
Because anthocyanin levels typically decline spontaneously during fermentation, decoloration, if necessary,
is usually performed after fermentation. However, if

487

experience indicates that this is likely to be inadequate
for the style desired, preparations with anthocyanase activity may be added before fermentation. The enzyme
removes the anthocyanin’s sugar moiety, reducing solubility and favoring precipitation. Loss of the sugar moiety also makes anthocyanins more susceptible to
oxidative decoloration. Because anthocyanase is inactivated by sulfur dioxide, ethanol, and high temperatures,
treatment normally follows juice clarification and before
the start of fermentation. At this point, the free sulfur dioxide content (if added) will have diminished, and little
ethanol will have been generated.
Another color removal/browning prevention technique uses laccase. The fungal polyphenol oxidase has
a wider range of substrates than grape polyphenol oxidases and acts over a wider range of conditions. It discolors anthocyanins and oxidizes other phenolics.
These can be subsequently removed with fining agents.
Unfortunately, laccase can oxidize colorless glutathionyl
caftaric acid complexes, enhancing subsequent browning potential. In addition, because laccase is not a
permitted wine additive, it must be immobilized
(Brenna and Bianchi, 1994). In this form, laccase remains
attached to a reactor through which wine is passed during treatment.
There are several means of reducing the browning potential of white wines including gentle pressing, short
maceration, phenolic removal with fining agents, adding sulfur dioxide before bottling, and acid addition to
musts of high pH. Roughly nine times more highly
oxidizable phenolate flavonoids are present at a pH of
4.0 than at a pH of 3.0 (Singleton, 1987). Catechin-type
phenolics have the strongest correlation with browning
potential (Simpson, 1982). Of these, epicatechin appears
to be most active in the production of yellowish xanthylium pigments (Clark et al., 2010). Contributing factors
in pigment accumulation include iron (a catalyst) and
caffeic acid (an inhibitor) (George et al., 2006).
Another technique limiting browning potential involves removing readily oxidized phenolics before
fermentation. This can vary from permitting air exposure during crushing to hyperoxygenation (bubbling
air through the must) (Schneider, 1998). It may take
from one to three saturations (9e30 mg/L) to protect
the wine against premature oxidative browning
(depending on the must’s flavonoid content). Without
maceration, oxygen uptake during crushing is usually
inadequate to induce sufficient phenolic oxidation.
Most oxidized phenols precipitate during fermentation,
leaving the wine bright and with a reduced tendency to
brown. The removal of oxidized phenolics is partially
due to their adherence to yeast cells that precipitate
postfermentation. Hyperoxidation is usually conducted

488

7. Fermentation

immediately after crushing and before clarification and
SO2 addition. Sulfur dioxide reduces one of the primary
oxidation products (caftaric acid quinone). Hyperoxidation also reduces the bitterness and astringency of flavonoids extracted during long maceration. Clarification
after hyperoxidation is usually required to remove
precipitated phenolics to prevent their resolubilization.
Although the clarified juice appears brownish, it subsequently clears during fermentation.
Whether hyperoxidation has positive, negative, or
neutral effects on wine aroma, depends principally on
the variety employed, their potential for oxidative
browning, and the type of clarification involved. The effects on aroma development are highly variable and no
generalities seem apparent.
Addition of sulfur dioxide
Sulfur dioxide supplied at about 50e100 mg/L juice
(or must) used to be habitual, the precise amount
depending on the health of the fruit and the maceration
temperature. This practice was recommended on the
belief that it controlled the growth and metabolism of
indigenous members of the grape flora as well as provided needed protection from oxidation. Research has
thrown this practice into question, especially with
healthy grapes chilled and macerated at cool temperatures. Inoculation with Saccharomyces cerevisiae may itself
be adequate to suppress other yeasts (Henick-Kling
et al., 1998). Although sulfur dioxide limits the activity
of indigenous yeasts before S. cerevisiae takes over and
completes fermentation (Fig. 7.16), the degree of suppression depends on the species and strain. With yeast
inoculation, rapid growth of the added strain speeds
the development of anaerobic conditions; reduces the
availability of limiting nutrients; and generates levels
of ethanol that are often inhibitory or toxic to most yeasts
and bacteria at wine pH values. In spontaneous fermentations, sulfur dioxide tends to retard the onset of active
fermentation, by suppressing not only non-Saccharomyces spp. but also most endemic strains of Saccharomyces (Suzzi and Romano, 1982).
Sulfur dioxide is particularly effective against
bacteriad its action being accentuated by the juice’s
low pH. It favors the presence of the most toxic form of
sulfur dioxide (molecular SO2). Thus, where an early
onset of malolactic fermentation is desired, the addition
of sulfur dioxide before fermentation is best avoided.
However, avoiding the addition of sulfur dioxide in musts
of high pH could favor the activity of spoilage lactic acid
bacteria, notably Pediococcus and Lactobacillus spp. (Davis
et al., 1986a, b). In addition, sulfur dioxide use can occasionally facilitate malolactic fermentation, by inhibiting
endemic lactic acid bacteria that might infect Oenococcus
oeni with bacteriophage (Davis et al., 1985). This is another

example where successful winemaking is a combination
of science, art, experience, and good luck.
If added to juice/must, sulfur dioxide is usually supplied several hours before yeast inoculation (either at
harvest or before crushing). During the settling period,
the free SO2 content declines rapidly (as it binds with
sugars, carbonyls, and phenolics or is taken up by microbes). Thus, the antimicrobial effect of sulfur dioxide
is much reduced when and if the must is inoculated
with one or more cultured yeast strains. For musts
derived from partially moldy grapes, the traditional
dose of sulfur dioxide is increased. Not only are the
numbers of microbial contaminants much higher, but
the presence of microbial by-products (e.g., glucuronic
acid and galacturonic acid), can bind sulfur dioxide,
reducing its antimicrobial effects.
While there is doubt about the need for sulfur dioxide’s antimicrobial action in juice, there is even more
incertitude concerning the effectiveness and need for
its inhibition of grape polyphenol oxidases. Depending
on the variety, between 25 and 100 mg SO2/liter may
be required to inhibit the early (enzymatic) oxidation
of phenolics (White and Ough, 1973). As a result, these
phenolics may remain in the juice, leading to increased
potential for in-bottle browning. Regrettably, the undesirable oxidation induced by fungal laccases (found in
moldy grapes) is not controlled by commercially acceptable additions of sulfur dioxide. In the past, ascorbic
acid was added along with sulfur dioxide to limit early
phenolic oxidation. Although effective in this regard,
ascorbic acid induces even further delays in oxidation
and precipitation of readily oxidized phenolics, potentially postponing the process until after bottling (Peng
et al., 1998). Ascorbic acid addition to white wine after
crushing now tends to be discouraged. This may apply
more to wine of higher alcohol contentsdascorbic acid
degradation (and subsequent browning reactions) being
directly correlated with alcohol concentration (Hsu
et al., 2012).
With red wines, sulfur dioxide can bleach anthocyanins. Although reversible, sulfur dioxide also binds to
flavonoids, delaying as well as limiting the formation
of stable, colored, anthocyaninetannin complexes. In
addition, by binding with acetaldehyde and pyruvic
acid, sulfur dioxide can delay the formation of vitisins
(Morata et al., 2006).
The effects of sulfur dioxide on yeast-derived flavorants (Herraiz et al., 1990) as well as their imparting of a
metallic taste are additional points of concern. Thus,
whether the antimicrobial and antioxidant effects of
sulfur dioxide are more beneficial or detrimental
applied before fermentation depends on grape health
and maturity, the cultivar involved, and the wine style
desired.

489

Alcoholic fermentation

cfu mL–1
108

0 mg L–1 SO4 added to must

106

(0%
EtOH)

105
104

0.8% 0.9%

50 mg L–1 SO4 added to must

96.5%

95.2%

107
0–5 days

20 mg L–1 SO4 added to must

2.7%

2.5%
0.3% 0.2%

0.1%

0.3%

0.2%

0.2%

93.5%

0.04%

6.5%

103
107
6–15 days 106
(0–4%
EtOH)

105

28.0%
0.4%

0.1%0.2%

71.1%

74.6%

25.1%

0.3%

89.8%
1.0%

0.3%

9.2%

104
103
107

>15 days
(4–12%
EtOH)

106

99.1%

100 %

100 %

0.9%

105
104
103
102

.
.
.
i
i
i
ii
i
ii
a ied iae
a
d ae
d i nt
sp a
d i nti
sp ma
ta ied iae
sp
di
ta
nt
f
at
s
s
la tifie visi
o n ure es rrim ula ntif vis
o n ure
ri
on ure ces erim icul enti evi
e
u
r
n
e
c
c
c
m
m
c
e
a
i
m
e
e
r
a
e
r
l
y ch
y
y ch
p
r
l
r
la
h
id
pi ide cer
er
ce
ap nid ce
l l i e us rom ulc a a
llie cus rom pul ra a l un
i l l i cus rom pul
n
i
i
s
a
u
s
u
u
s
u
c
r
e
l
a ap
e
g oc
g oc
a
gu oc cha ia
er al
ha ia
ce
ce
ke ra
yc
i
a
a
c
ch
ck er
a
c
w
ck ver my
cc ow
i d pto
i d toc ac ow
ec eve my
id pto sac iko
e
a
oe ev rom
d
d
o
l
k
d
o
o
s
p
i
s
S
ik
K
S aro
Kl
Se har
Kl
a n Cry go hn
a n Cry
an Cry ygo chn
ha
go hn
C
C
C
ch
cc
Z ets
Zy tsc
Zy tsc
cc
c
a
e
e
S
Sa
Sa
M
M
M

FIGURE 7.16 Predominance (% colonies recovered) and total cell numbers (cfu/mL) of all yeasts during uninoculated fermentations at 16 C
with three sulfite treatments. From Henick-Kling, T., Edinger, W., Daniel, P., Monk, P., 1998. Selective effects of sulfur dioxide and yeast starter culture
addition on indigenous yeast populations and sensory characteristics of wine. J. Appl. Microbiol. 84, 865e876, reproduced by permission.

Because of some of the potentially detrimental aspects of sulfur dioxide use, extensive studies have
investigated how to reduce or eliminate its use. One of
the more interesting techniques involves substituting
dry ice for sulfur dioxide (Corona, 2010). It avoids the
tendency of sulfur dioxide to enhance phenolic extraction while still reducing polyphenol oxidase activity. It
also enhances desirable flavorant extraction.

Alcoholic fermentation
Fermentors
Fermentors come in a wide variety of shapes, sizes,
and technical designs. Most differ little in design from
those used centuries ago. However, some are complex
and fashioned for specific purposes. Most fermentors
are straight-sided (Plate 7.4) or have the form of slightly
inverted cones. Tanks are differentiated from vats by

being closed, whereas vats have open tops. Tanks have
the potential of being used as storage cooperage,
whereas vats are limited to their role as fermentors.
Batch-type fermentors
During the fermentation of red wines, some carbon
dioxide released during yeast metabolism becomes
entrapped in the pomace. This causes the pomace to
rise to the top, forming a cap. This severely restricts
contact between the pomace and most of the juice,
retarding the extraction of anthocyanins and other compounds from the skins and pulp. Many design features
of modern fermentors are intended to solve this
problem.
With vats, periodic submerging of the cap into the fermenting must (punching down) often achieved
adequate extraction and temperature equilibration.
Automatic methods of achieving the same benefits
only became widely available in the later part of the

490

7. Fermentation

PLATE 7.4 Winery with large stainless steel fermentation tanks.
Photo courtesy of Gary Pickering, Brock University, St Catharines, Canada.

20th century. Since their development, tanks have
almost completely replaced vats. Because they have
closed tops, exposure to airborne contaminants and oxygen can largely be avoided.
Since the 1950s, there has been a move away from
wooden fermentation tanks (e.g., oak, chestnut, redwood) to more impervious and inert materials. Cement
has been used in some regions, but stainless steel is the
preferred material. Fiberglass tanks also have an appeal
due to their lighter weight and lower production costs.
Modern adjustments to oak tanks have again reintroduced them as a viable option for those desiring a more
traditional fermentor. They can be produced with a Plexiglas “window” replacing one of staves, permitting the
progress of the fermentation to be observed. They can
be fitted with cooling coils and are far easier to empty
and clean than in the past (Plate 7.5). Nevertheless, stainless steel has one distinct advantage over all other
materialsdrapid heat transfer. This facilitates maintenance of desired fermentation temperatures.
Years ago, when water seemed limitless and inexpensive, rapid heat transfer from stainless steel tanks could
be achieved by flushing water over the sides. Evaporation acted as the coolant. However, the development of
double-jacketed tanks, with a coolant circulating between the inner and outer walls, provided more versatile and precise temperature regulation. Temperature
control in tanks constructed of other materials usually
requires the insertion of cooling coils or plates in the
fermentor or pumping the fermenting juice through
external cooling coils. Adequate temperature control
avoids the need for defoaming agents. Otherwise, these
may be required to prevent excessive froth development
and wine loss associated with its discharge through
overflow valves. Common commercial defoaming

PLATE 7.5 Oak fermentor (Tonnellerie Seguin Moreau, Merpins,
Cognac, France). Photo courtesy Ronald S. Jackson.

agents consist of a mixture of mono- and diglycerides
of oleic acid and polydimethylsiloxane.
As a construction material, cement has some initial
advantages. They are less expensive to build than equivalently sized stainless-steel tanks. However, cement is
difficult to surface-sterilize. Epoxy coatings help but
require frequent maintenance. Another option is lining
the tank with ceramic tiles or vitrification.
White wine fermentors are generally of simple
design. The primary technical requirements are prevention of oxygen exposure and efficient temperature control. The first goal is easily achieved with a tank. For
temperature regulation, if the juice is not sufficiently
cool to begin with, it is usually chilled to an appropriate
temperature before yeast inoculation. This is normally
achieved with cooling coils but can be more rapidly obtained by adding food-grade dry ice or liquid nitrogen.
The ferment is usually maintained within a relatively
narrow temperature range throughout fermentation.
The desired temperature can vary considerably depending on the desires and preferences of the winemaker.
Cooler temperatures (10e15 C) tend to encourage the
production and retention of fruit esters, whereas
warmer temperatures favor the development of varietal
fragrances in certain cultivarsdfor example, Sauvignon
blanc (Masneuf-Pomarède et al., 2006).
Historically, fermentors for red wine production were
vats of simple design. Cap formation, vigorous carbon
dioxide production, and a higher phenol content often
provided the fermenting juice with adequate protection
from oxygen exposure. Also, if the cellars were cool, and

Alcoholic fermentation

the volumes relatively limited (50e100 hL), fermentation was sufficiently restrained that cooling was
unnecessary.
Fermentation often occurred at or was allowed to rise
to 25e28 C. Periodically punching the cap down into
the fermenting must partially equilibrated the temperate
throughout the vat. In addition, it facilitated the release
and dispersion of potassium (extracted from the skins)
throughout the must. This helped limit both an excessive rise in cap pH and the growth of spoilage microbes.
At the same time, it submerged most potential spoilage
organisms into the inhibitory anaerobic conditions of the
fermenting juice. Punching down also promoted the
more effective extraction of anthocyanins, favoring
optimal color development. Finally, the procedure
partially aerated the fermenting must, facilitating yeast
growth.
However, when a shift from vats to large tanks began,
the development of mechanical substitutes for manual
punching down became necessary. This spawned an
incredible array of ingenious inventions. One of the first
was devised by Gervais (1820). It consisted of one cover
or a series of covers that floated in the must at different
levels. Carbon dioxide trapped in the cap caused the
cover(s) to rise periodically. As they rose, they were trapped at one (or more) positions against the inward
sloping sides of the tank. The publication also included
plans for an ingenious device to collect alcohol and other
volatiles lost from barrels during fermentation for readdition to the fermented wine.
One of the more novel designs is the pileage fermentor.
It possesses mechanical cap plungers to simulate the action of manual punching down (Fig. 7.17). Open vat versions are available if exposure to air is deemed desirable.
This is often viewed as valuable with musts of high  Brix
values to encourage fermentation going to completion.
Other modern solutions include automatic periodic
or continuous pumping of juice over the cap. This may
involve rotating sprinklers or a spout that submerges
the cap as it moves over the cap. The flow of juice may
be combined with temperature control by passing the
must through cooling coils. Oxygen uptake can be
limited during pumping over by filling the headspace
with inert gas (N2 or CO2). This may be important at
the beginning and end of fermentation, especially if it
occurs slowly. During both stages, flushing of the headspace with carbon dioxide released during fermentation
is limited. A stable cap, exposed to oxygen, is particularly susceptible to uncontrolled microbial spoilage.
An alternative procedure for encouraging color and
flavor extraction as well as must cooling and limited
aeration (to favor yeast growth) is délestage. The procedure has several variants but usually consists of the
following. After fermentation has become sufficiently
vigorous to produce a cap, the juice is drained into a

491

FIGURE 7.17

Diagram of a pileage fermentor showing the
punching-down action of a system of stainless steel plungers and flaps
on the cap of fermenting red must. Modified from Anonymous, 1983.
Steel feet punch the cap at Buena Vista. Wines Vines 64 (2), 52, reproduced
by permission.

holding tank. The juice often passes through a mesh to
withhold seeds suspended in the juice (termed déportation). The juice is pumped and sprayed into a second
tank, while the cap in the fermentor completes draining.
The juice is then pumped back into the fermentor,
achieving a second aeration while also breaking up the
pomace (cap). The procedure may be repeated several
times during fermentation. The procedure improves
anthocyanin extraction and the early formation of polymeric pigments (Bosso et al., 2001; Zoecklein et al., 2004).
It is also reported to be particularly valuable with incompletely ripened grapes, as it provides an opportunity to
remove most of the immature (“green”) seeds (see Canals et al., 2008). They possess a high proportion of
extractable phenolics.
Autofermentors achieve the same advantages as délestage, but automatically. They generally possess two
superimposed chambers. The lower (main) chamber contains two traps into a smaller upper chamber. An elongated, cone-shaped cylinder may descend from the
upper into main chamber. In the Ganimede model, carbon dioxide generated during fermentation partially accumulates between the cone and sides of the fermentor.
This increases must volume, pushing a portion of the
juice and pomace cap into the upper chamber. At a
certain point, the increasing pressure opens a bypass
into the upper chamber, and a portion of the carbon dioxide and fermenting juice gushes into the upper chamber.
This mixes the juice with the extract-concentrated cap.

492

7. Fermentation

The disrupted cap and juice flow back into the lower
chamber and the bypass closes. As more carbon dioxide
is generated (and is trapped between the cone and sides
of the fermentor), it forces the cap and juice back into the
upper chamber. Repetitions of the cycle accentuate
extraction of anthocyanins and flavorants. Seeds settle
to the bottom of the fermentor. Comparisons with more
traditional winemaking techniques are given in Vázquez
et al. (2010) and Bai et al. (2013).
In another design, perforations in the cylinder prevent
the pomace from escaping into the upper chamber, where
the fermenting juice cools slightly. Its weight forces a second, downward-directing trap to open. The flush of juice
back in the main chamber ruptures the cap and temporarily disperses it into the fermenting must. In this
version, the cap is normally submerged. A simpler system for achieving a submerged cap involves a grill
located below the surface of the must. Although these
autofermentors avoid the need of punching down, additional agitation is required to achieve adequate mixing of
the must for color extraction.
Rotary fermentors are another solution designed to
improve and automate color and flavor extraction
(Fig. 7.18). The horizontal position of the fermentor increases the surface contact between the juice and the
pomace. Rotation of spirally shaped paddles gently,
but continuously, mixes the fermenting juice with the
pomace. Alternatively, the fermentor may be set to produce a gentle rocking back-and-forth. Although the fermentors principal advantage comes from the rapid
extraction of flavor and anthocyanins (Catania et al.,
2011), it also avoids temperature stratification between
the cap and fermenting juice (see Fig. 7.46). In addition,
by permitting earlier pressing, the juice can be separated
from the pomace before most bitter/astringent polyphenolics are extracted. This facilitates the production of red
wine designed for early consumption or to permit early
transfer of the ferment to barrel for the completion of
fermentation.

FIGURE 7.18

Diagram of a rotary fermentor. Courtesy of CMMC.

Rotary fermentors, and other automated replacements for punching down, have the distinct advantage of reducing the likelihood of microbial spoilage
developing in the cap. Nonetheless, the associated
reduced oxygen uptake by the must may increase
the incidence of sluggish or stuck fermentation. Where
a concern, techniques for microoxygenation are available to supply the amount of oxygen considered
appropriate.
Although rotary fermentors are most frequently used
for red wines, they may be used to shorten the maceration time needed to achieve flavor extraction from
several white varieties, notably Chardonnay, Gewürztraminer, and Riesling.
The major disadvantage of most automatic fermentors comes from the increased investment required in
their purchase. In addition, if the ferment is separated
too early, reduced phenolic extraction can compromise
the formation of stable, colored, anthocyaninetannin
polymers. Nevertheless, shorter holding periods can
achieve cost-saving by limiting the number of fermentors needed to process large volumes of must.
When investigating any new procedure, it is important to make assessments relative to the development
of attributes over at least several years. For example, a
comparison between standard floating-cap and
submerged-cap fermentations of a Barbera wine
initially indicated reduced color and phenolic content
in the submerged-cap wine. However, during aging,
the submerged-cap version retained higher values of
both (Bosso et al., 2011).
Modern fermentors typically include systems to
ease pomace discharge. For this purpose, sloped bottoms with trap doors are often used. Removable tank
bottoms are another solution. With rotary fermentors,
rotation can position the opening to facilitate
discharge.
In a few regions, wine is still fermented (and matured)
in large (500 to >1000 L) clay vessels, resembling those
used by the ancient Greeks (pithoi) and Romans (dolia).
Examples of their use include traditionally produced
Georgian kvevri wines, Montilla-Moriles sherry-like
wines (produced in tinaja), and some wines from Alentejo, Portugal (produced in talhas de barro) (e.g., Martins
et al., 2018). The vessels may be submerged in soil up
to their neck (as in Georgia) or partially or totally positioned above ground (e.g., in Spain and Portugal). Impermeability may be achieved with pine pitch (as in
antiquity and still with talha) or with bees wax (kvevri).
This is distinct from modern experimentation with the
use of amphoras for maturation. It is being adopted by
some producers wishing to be associated with the “natural wine movement” (Baiano et al., 2014). A few producers are also experimenting with maturing wine in
amphorae submerged in the sea.

Alcoholic fermentation

Continuous fermentation and related procedures
Most fermentors are of the batch type; that is, separate
volumes (batches) of juice/must are individually fermented. In contrast, most industrial fermentations are
continuous. Substrate is added at a relatively constant
rate or at frequent intervals, while equivalent volumes
of the ferment are removed, maintaining a constant volume. Continuous fermentors may operate uninterrupted for weeks or months. For the industrial
production of single metabolic products, synthesized
primarily during a particular phase of colony growth,
continuous fermentation is ideal. It can maintain most
cells in a phase where synthesis of the desired metabolic
product is at its optimum, resulting is superior costefficiency. The technique is less compatible with enologic practice, especially due to wine quality depending
on subtle and complex associations of dozens of compounds produced at various stages during fermentation.
Despite the cost-savings associated with continuous
fermentation, it is rarely used in winemaking, even to
produce bulk wines. Their expense and complexity
means that continuous fermentors are economically
feasible only when used almost year-round. This, in
turn, demands a steady supply of must. With the seasonal character of the grape harvest, this requires the
storage of must under sterile, nonoxidizing conditions.
These requirements necessitate more sophisticated storage than would be needed to store the corresponding
volume of wine. Thus, technical and financial concerns
generally outweigh the benefits of product uniformity,
and the easier alcoholic and malolactic fermentations
achieved. Nevertheless, yeast immobilization (Iconomou et al., 1996; Verbelen et al., 2006) may make continuous fermentation more applicable as a means of
reducing production costs. Even with traditional
batch-type fermentations, immobilized yeasts have
shown sensory benefits (Tsakiris et al., 2004).
Another technique is cell-recycle-batch fermentation
(Rosini, 1986). After each fermentation, the yeasts are
collected and used to initiate subsequent fermentations.
Collection may involve filtration, centrifugation, or
spontaneous sedimentation. In addition to reducing
inoculation costs, fermentation is shortened and the
efficiency of sugar conversion to ethanol is slightly
improved. There is also a reduction in the synthesis of
sulfur dioxide by yeast cells, but an increase in volatile
acidity. Because cell division continues, but at progressively reduced rates, frequent monitoring for contamination with undesirable yeasts and bacteria is
necessary. In addition, periodic assessment is required
to assess that the genetic characteristics of the yeast

493

population have not changed. Both requirements may
be reduced using immobilization in calcium alginate
beads (Suzzi et al., 1996).
Immobilization, involving the entrapment of cells
within alginate beads, has several potential advantages
(Diviès et al., 1994). Its use could significantly reduce
the production costs associated with disgorging in sparkling wine production. In addition, encapsulation appears to give cells enhanced resistance to low
temperatures and high concentrations of ethanol and
acetic acid (Krisch and Szajáni, 1997). Entrapment may
also modify the composition of fermentation byproducts. For example, glycerol, propanol, and isoamyl
alcohol production may be increased, whereas acetaldehyde generation decreased. None of these methods are
used in traditional wine producing regions.
Fermentor size
Optimal fermentor size relates primarily to the volumes of juice or must normally fermented. Only with
small lots of juice/must, possessing unique qualities,
do tanks specifically designed to accentuate these features become economic.
Small juice/must volumes may result from limited
vineyard holdings; desires to keep the grapes from
different clones or varieties separate; and selective harvesting to collect fruit at distinct states of maturity. An
example of the latter is the selection involved in producing higher-level Prädikat and botrytized wines. Separate
fermentation maintains the individuality of unique lots.
In any of these situations, fermentation may be conducted in small oak cooperage. Although in popular perception small is equated with better, there is no inherent
linkage between the two.
In addition to maintaining the individual attributes of
small lots of juice or must, in-barrel fermentation possesses additional advantages as well as disadvantages.
Because cooling occurs only by passive heat radiation,
fermentation may occur at higher temperatures than
currently preferred for white wine. Fruit-smelling acetate esters, formed by yeasts during fermentation, dissipate (sparge) more readily at warmer temperatures
along with escaping carbon dioxide (see Fig. 7.44).
This may achieve a clearer varietal expression with cultivars possessing distinctive aromas (less association
with a general fruity background). Otherwise, it is a
disadvantage.
Wine fermented in small fermentors is usually left on
the lees longer than in large fermentors. This favors
earlier onset of malolactic fermentation, but also increases the risk of off-odor production. This may be

494

7. Fermentation

reduced by the use of yeast strains synthesizing little
hydrogen sulfide (Cordente et al., 2007, 2009). In addition, periodic mixing of the lees and must (bâttonage)
provides aeration that further decreases the likelihood
of reduced-sulfur odor development in the lees. Yeast
viability is also enhanced by slight aeration. This is anecdotally credited with contributing to better integration
of oak flavors and tannins in the wine.
On the negative side, more effort is involved in
topping, racking, cleaning, sterilizing, and maintaining
small wood fermentors. There is also an increased risk
of oxidation as well as yeast and bacterial spoilage
(Stuckey et al., 1991). In small amounts, acetaldehyde
and acetic acid production, and the uptake of oak flavors, can increase wine complexity. Nevertheless, excess
amounts can mar subtle wine flavors. The risk of microbial contamination increases with barrel reuse.
For many premium wines, fermentors range in size
from 50 to 100 hL. Such volumes appear to provide a
judicious balance between economics and ease of operation, and the desire to maintain individuality. For most
wines, though, the economies of size favor fewer but
larger fermentors. In this case, fermentors with capacities from 200 to more than 2000 hL (w50,000 gal) are
practical. Computers have permitted the monitoring
and regulation required with gargantuan fermentors.
Advances in spectroscopy and other analytic techniques
permit real-time analysis of multiple chemical parameters during fermentation (Dubernet, 2010; Cozzolino
et al., 2011). Quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance
is also being investigated as a potential procedure for
profiling metabolite production during fermentation
(López-Rituerto et al., 2009).
Such technical advances should facilitate the development and use of computer fermentation algorithms
designed to produce wines possessing precise sensory
attributes. In conjunction with real-time, on-site data,
models could anticipate the development of potential
problems, predict their likely consequences as well as
suggest solutionsdwinemaking on autopilot.
Associated with enlarged fermentor volumes is
increased temperature and dispersion control issues. In
large fermentors, passive heat dissipation via the surface
is insufficient to prevent excessive heat buildup, resulting
in a premature termination of fermentation. This requires
the instillation of sophisticated temperature control systems. Large must volumes also increase the likelihood of
excessive foaming and wine loss (and the potential need
for defoamers). Sedimentation of large amounts of grape
solids and yeasts can delay the onset of active fermentation.
Without intentional mixing, fermentation begins principally at the base, with the yeast population slowly rising upwards through the fermentor volume, becoming uniform
only when cell division ceases and carbon dioxide production is pronounced (Vlassides and Block, 2000).

Temperature stratification is generally limited by
pumping-over, requiring half the volume being transferred
twice per day (Lerno et al., 2018). Despite the potential
problems associated with colossal fermentors, the economics of size often more than compensates for their
disadvantages.

Fermentation
Chemically, fermentation is an energy-releasing form
of metabolism in which the substrate (initial electron
donor) and end product (final electron acceptor) are
organic compounds. It differs fundamentally from respiration in not requiring the involvement of molecular oxygen. Although many fermentative pathways exist,
S. cerevisiae possesses the most commondalcoholic
fermentation. In it, ethanol acts as the final electron
acceptor (end product), whereas glucose is the preferred
electron donor (substrate). Although S. cerevisiae possesses the ability to respire, it predominantly ferments,
even in the presence of oxygen.
Although most organisms are able to ferment sugars,
they do so only when oxygen is lacking or deficient. This
partially results from the toxic action of the usual byproducts of fermentation, ethanol, or lactic acid. In addition, fermentation is inherently an inefficient mode of
energy release. For example, alcoholic fermentation converts only about 6%e8% of the chemical-bond energy of
glucose into readily available metabolic energy as adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Most of the energy remains
bound in the terminal electron acceptordethanol.
Although seemingly a disadvantage, yeasts utilize
limited oxidative phosphorylation (Vander Heiden
et al., 2009). Fermentation supplies the carbon skeletons
necessary for growth as well as sufficient reducing power in the form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH). In the short term, fermentative
metabolism is adequate.
The two main organisms involved in vinification,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Oenococcus oeni, are somewhat unusual in selectively employing fermentative
metabolism. S. cerevisiae is so well adapted to fermentative metabolism that it can generate as many ATP/sec as
would normally be generated by respiration (Pfeiffer
et al., 2001). These properties are partially based on the
presence of a highly efficient alcohol dehydrogenase
(ADH1), oxidizing acetaldehyde to ethanol; a high titer
of glycolytic enzymes in the cytoplasm; and a mitochondrion that only produces respiratory enzymes in the
presence of a preponderance of nonfermentable substrates (Ihmels et al., 2005). In addition, both
S. cerevisiae and O. oeni can withstand moderately high
ethanol concentrations.
In addition to preferential alcoholic fermentation (suppression of respiration by glucose) as well as alcohol and

Alcoholic fermentation

acid tolerance, Saccharomyces cerevisiae is osmo-tolerant
and can multiply several times in the absence of oxygen.
Thus, it is amazingly preadapted for growing in must. By
rapidly producing and secreting large amounts of
ethanol, wine yeast soon exclude most other potential
competitors from growing in grape juice (Hagman and
Piskur, 2015). S. cerevisiae also has the highest cardinal
temperature-growth parameters of any Saccharomyces or
non-Saccharomyces spp. (Salvadó et al., 2011)d
appropriate for fermentation in large cooperage before
refrigeration.
Oenococcus oeni is less well adapted to growing in
grape juice or must than S. cerevisiae. It typically grows
slowly in juice, developing most commonly in wine after
S. cerevisiae has completed alcoholic fermentation. The
production of lactic acid, the major by-product of
O. oeni metabolism, limits the growth of other potential
bacterial competitors. Lactic acid bacteria are one of the
few acid-tolerant bacterial groups. However, the acidity
of grape juice and wine actually retards or inhibits the
growth of most lactic acid bacteria. Thus, in this
instance, converting malic acid to lactic acid, a weaker
acid, has the benefit of increasing the pH, favoring the
growth of O. oeni. It also can improve microbial stability,
by consuming residual fermentable substrates, and
generate flavorants often viewed as desirable. Incidentally, the conversion makes excessively acidic wines
more acceptable to the human palate.
Because wine is typically batch-fermented, nutrient
availability is maximal at the beginning of fermentation,
and declines progressively thereafter. By the end of
fermentation, most sugars have been metabolized, leaving the wine “dry” and most other nutrients significantly depleted.
Batch fermentations generally show a growth pattern
consisting of four, clearly distinguishable phasesdlag,
log, stationary, and decline. Immediately following inoculation, cells need to adjust to the conditions of the new substrate. Because some cells do not acclimate successfully,
there is an initial period in which cells have yet to begin
to divide and/or the number of dividing cells approximates the number that die. This is called the lag phase.
Once adapted, the cells begin to multiply at a steady
rate, until conditions become unfavorable. Because most
microbes are unicellular, the growth curve approximates
an exponential equation, and the phase is correspondingly called the exponential or log (logarithmic) phase.
During this period, the population of viable cells rapidly
increases to its maximum value.
As the nutrient content declines, there is an accompanying accumulation of toxic metabolic by-products.
Thus, after a period of rapid growth, the rate of cell division (growth) declines. The colony enters a state in which
the number of cells dying (or become metabolically inactive) and dividing is equal. The culture is said to have
now entered the stationary phase. This involves

495

considerable transcriptional modification by the cell
(Rossignol et al., 2003). As nutrient conditions continue
to deteriorate, and the concentration of toxic metabolites
keeps increasing, more cells die (or become dormant)
than divide. At this point, the culture enters a decline
phase. Because most viable cells are not replaced, the colony eventually perishes or becomes dormant.
Although similar, the population growth pattern displayed by yeast growth in must shows several variations
from the norm (Fig. 7.19). The lag phase is abnormally
short or undetectable; the exponential phase is relatively
short (seldom involving more than eight cell divisions
when the must is inoculated); the stationary phase
may be short (commencing long before nutrients
become limiting); and the decline phase is atypically
long (with the viable cell population remaining high
for up to several months). As much as 40% of the sugar
fermented to alcohol may occur during the decline
phase (Ribéreau-Gayon, 1985).
The brevity or apparent absence of a lag phase may
result from the preadapted state of the cells initiating
fermentation. Active dry yeast, commonly used for inoculation, comes from cultures grown exponentially in
aerated media. Although possessing mitochondria
capable of respiration, their cytoplasm contains a full
complement of fermentative enzymes. Thus, little time
is required for a conversion from respiratory to fermentative metabolism. Similarly, the epiphytic yeast population of grapes requires little enzymatic adaptation to
commence rapid cell growth. Endemic yeast cells are
commonly bathed in the juice released from broken
grapes during harvesting and may pass through the
lag phase before fermentation “officially” begins in the
winery. Thus, the absence of a noticeable lag period
may simply be an artifact. Even dormant yeast inocula,
derived from winery equipment, may contain a full
complement of enzymes and be prepared for a rapid
initiation of growth.
Although physiological adjustment to growth in
grape juice appears minimal, a lag phase may be
observed when conditions are less than optimal. Conditions such as low temperature (10 C) and excessive
protection of the juice from oxygen during crushing
may disadvantage yeast cells. Active dry yeast cells
are often leaky, and initially may lose vital nutrients
(Kraus et al., 1981). In addition, nitrogen deficiency
and low juice pH can prolong any lag phase. The latter
probably results from the enhanced antimicrobial action
of any added sulfur dioxide (Ough, 1966a). High  Brix
values or ethanol contents (for example, the second
fermentation in sparkling wine production) also suppress yeast growth and fermentation rate (Ough,
1966a, 1966b).
During the exponential phase, cells grow and reproduce at the maximal rate permitted by the prevailing
conditions. The presence or absence of oxygen does

496

7. Fermentation

not appear to affect the rate (Schulze et al., 1996). The
protein content of the cytoplasm approaches 60% (w/
w), with the RNA content reaching about 15% (w/w).
Little storage carbohydrate (glycerol and trehalose)
accumulates.
Early termination of exponential growth may
partially be the result of the initial inoculation (at about
105e106 cells/mL), rapidly risings to 108e109 viable
cells/mL. Thus, the slowing and termination of cell division (while there are still ample nutrients in the juice/
must) is likely an expression of quorum sensing (Avbelj
et al., 2015). Many more cell divisions occur during
spontaneous fermentations, where the grape epiphytic
population is reduced as a result of clarification, and
the population of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is initially
low. Increasing sensitivity to the accumulating ethanol
concentration during fermentation may also partially

explain why the viable cell count seldom rises above
108 cells/mL. Ethanol eventually disrupts glucose uptake by affecting membrane function. However, other
factors appear to be involved. Populations can still reach
106e108 cells/mL in juice initially fortified to 8%
ethanol. Other limiting factors may include the inability
of yeasts to synthesize essential sterols and long-chain
unsaturated fatty acids in the absence of oxygen, the
accumulation of toxic, mid-size, carboxylic acids (byproducts of yeast metabolism); and reduction in the nitrogen supply may accentuate catabolic repression by
glucose (Bely et al., 1994). One factor clearly not
involved is a lack of fermentable substrate. Cells enter
the stationary phase with approximately half the
fermentable sugar content still present. The remaining
sugars are slowly metabolized during the stationary
and decline phasesdconstituting up to 80% of the total

FIGURE 7.19 Growth cycle of yeasts
and fermentation kinetics in grape must
with a high sugar content. Diagram courtesy
of Herman Casteleyn.

200
ntent
nol co
Etha

108
800

10

7.5

400

% Ethanol (v/v)

10

7

Viable yeast cells per (ml)

Anthocyanins (mg/L)

600

Sugar content (g/L)

150
Anthocyanin content

100

5
Vi
ab

le

cel

106

l co

unt

50
2.5

200

Sug
ar c

0

onten
t

0

105
0

10

DAYS

20

30

40

0

Alcoholic fermentation

fermentation period (Ribéreau-Gayon, 1985), and between 50% and 80% of the sugars metabolized.
As yeast cells enter the stationary phase, their
enzyme complement changes, several heat-shock proteins (HSPs) are produced (Riou et al., 1997), and trehalose and glycerol accumulate. Trehalose helps stabilize
membrane fluidity (Iwahashi et al., 1995); limits
ethanol toxicity (Lucero et al., 2000); and restricts protein denaturation (Hottiger et al., 1994). HSPs also protect structural and enzymic proteins from denaturation
(Parsel et al., 1994). In addition, HSPs may play important roles in prolonging cell viability during the decline
phase.
Initiation of the decline phase probably results from
membrane dysfunction becoming progressively disruptive to cellular function. Membrane disorganization results from the combined effects of ethanol (Hallsworth,
1998), mid-chain fatty (carboxylic) acids (Viegas et al.,
1998), and a shortage in sterol precursors. The absence
of oxygen may be an additional factor. Its presence is
required for the synthesis of nicotinic acid, a vital
component of the electron carriers NADþ and NADPþ.
However, why the decline initially stabilizes at a viable
population of approximately 105e106 cells/mL for
several weeks is unknown. Cell viability is improved
by extended maceration before (white wines) or during
fermentation (red wines).
Subsequently, the cells progressively autolyze, dying
over the next several weeks to months. As a consequence, yeast nutrients and cellular constituents are
released into the wine. This is also associated with an
increased synthesis of HSP12. It interacts with membrane lipids, stabilizing its structure. As the membrane
breaks down, peptides released enhance wine sweetness
(Marchal et al., 2015).
Another distinction between industrial and wine fermentations is its microbially mixed status. Most industrial fermentations occur in a sterilized nutrient
medium. Except for continuous wine fermentations,
grape juice/must is not sterilized. Traditionally,
endemic non-Saccharomyces yeasts are active at the start
of fermentation, but are usually soon superceded by
indigenous Saccharomyces cerevisiae. These typically
continue and complete fermentation. However, this
sequence is less common than in the past, due to inoculation with selected yeast strain(s). Although sulfur dioxide may be added to limit indigenous (wild) yeasts,
it is only partially effective in that regard (Martı́nez
et al., 1989; Henick-Kling et al., 1998).
Previously, there was no adequate means of assessing whether wild S. cerevisiae were controlled by sulfur
dioxide. With techniques such as mitochondrial DNA
sequencing (Dubourdieu et al., 1987) and gene marker

497

analysis (Petering et al., 1991), it is now possible to
identify the strain(s) conducting fermentation.
Although species and strains occurring on grapes or
winery equipment may occasionally dominate the
fermentation of inoculated juice (Bouix et al., 1981),
inoculated yeasts appear to be the primary, if not the
only strain(s) detectable by the end of fermentation
(see Figs. 7.15 and 7.27).
Red wine vinifications routinely occur in the presence
of high concentrations of epiphytic yeasts, regardless of
yeast inoculation. In contrast, white grapes, which are
pressed shortly after crushing, cold settled, and quickly
clarified, usually contain a diminished endemic yeast
population. Nevertheless, white juice still possesses sufficient endemic yeasts to initiate and conduct alcoholic
fermentation. Although indigenous yeasts may be present and remain viable throughout a fermentation dominated by S. cerevisiae, they are typically viewed as being
metabolically inactive. Admittedly, though, unequivocal
evidence for this is absent.

Biochemistry of alcoholic fermentation
Wine fermentation involves the metabolism of
glucose and fructose to ethanol via glycolysis (Embdene
Meyerhof pathway) (Fig. 7.20). Although ethanol is the
primary end product, additional yeast metabolites
donate the basic aromatic attributes of wine. Yeast action
may also influence the development of a varietal aroma
by hydrolyzing nonvolatile aroma precursors. This can
release terpenes, phenols, norisoprenoids, and thiols as
free, volatile compounds. In addition, the changing
physicochemical conditions produced during fermentation progressively modify yeast metabolism, generating
the dynamically changing range of compounds released.
This reflects adjustments in cellular energy and nutrient
status, due to changes in the nutrients absorbed and byproducts both released and reabsorbed throughout
fermentation. Thus, much of a wine’s fragrance can be
interpreted in terms of adjustments in primary and secondary yeast metabolism.
Energy balance and the synthesis of metabolic
intermediates
During the changing phases of colony growth, yeasts
have differing requirements for ATP and reducing power (NADH and NADPH). These energy-carrying compounds are required to activate cellular functions and
maintain an acceptable ionic and redox balance. Ionic
balance refers to the maintenance of a subtle disequilibrium between various ions on either side of cellular
membranes. Redox balance refers primarily to the equilibrium between the oxidized and reduced forms of the

498

7. Fermentation

Glucose

Polysaccharides

Glucose 6-phosphate

6-Phosphogluconate

Fructose 6-phosphate

Pentose phosphates

Phosphoglyceraldehyde

Nucleotides

Hexose, Triose, Tetrose, and Septose
Sugar phosphates

Serine
family of
amino acids

Phosphoglycerate

Phenolic family
of amino acids

Phosphoenolpyruvate

Pyruvate
family of
amino acids

Glycerol

Lipids

Fatty acids

Ethanol

Pyruvate

Acetyl CoA

Malonyl CoA

Mevalonate

Steroids

Oxaloacetate

Pyrimidines and purines

Citrate

Malate
Glyoxylate

Aspartate
family of
amino acids

Purines

Fumarate
Isocitrate
Succinate
α-Ketoglutarate

Glutamate
family of
amino acids

FIGURE 7.20 Core reactions of metabolism showing the main energy-yielding pathways (bold arrows) and the major biosynthetic products
derived from central metabolism (boxes) The central pathway is the EmbdeneMeyerhof pathway of glycolysis, the top right shows a highly
schematic pentose phosphate pathway, and the bottom is the TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle. Each pathway has been simplified for clarity by the
omission of several intermediates. The directions of the reactions are shown as being unidirectional, although several are reversible. Energy
transformations and the loss or addition of carbon dioxide are not shown. Under the anaerobic conditions of vinification, the TCA cycle does not
function. However, except for the enzyme involved in the conversion of succinate to fumarate, those TCA enzymes present appear to be active
only in the cytoplasm. In addition, decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl CoA is inactive and the glyoxylic acid pathway is suppressed (by
glucose).

two major pyridine nucleotides (NADþ/NADH and
NADPþ/NADPH).
As glucose and fructose are oxidized to pyruvate,
electrons are transferred to NADþ (nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide), reducing it to NADH. Pyruvate
is subsequently decarboxylated to acetaldehyde,
which is subsequently reduced to ethanol with electrons derived from NADH. In the process, redox balance is maintained and the electron transfer cycle
complete.
The net synthesis of only ATP from sugar fermentation is inherently much less efficient than respiration.
Most chemical energy associated with the sugars remains bound in the end product, ethanol. The energy

associated with the electrons transferred to NADþ during fermentation is unavailable as they are transferred
to acetaldehyde in its reduction to ethanol. There is
no option, as in respiration, for the energy associated
in NADH to perform metabolic activity or to be transferred to ATP via the oxidative phosphorylation of
ADP (adenosine diphosphate). Under the anaerobic
conditions of fermentation, regeneration of oxidized
NADþ requires the reduction of an organic molecule.
Because cells contain only a limited supply of NAD,
without the regeneration of NADþ in acetaldehyde
reduction, the fermentation of sugars would quickly
cease. Correspondingly, alcoholic fermentation generates only about two molecules of ATP per sugar

499

Alcoholic fermentation

During alcoholic fermentation redox balance is
maintained, but no NADH accumulates. To obtain
the reducing power needed for growth and division,
yeast use the PPP (yielding NADPH) and oxidize pyruvic acid to acetic acid (yielding NADH). Additional
supplies come directly from NADH generated in
glycolysis, circumventing the recycling of NADH to
NADþ involved in the reduction acetaldehyde to
ethanol.
The changing needs of yeasts for reducing power during the phases of colony growth during fermentation
probably explains why compounds such as acetaldehyde and acetic acid are initially released into the juice,
but subsequently reincorporated (Figs. 7.21 and 7.22).
Early in fermentation, growth and cell division require
reducing power. In contrast, in the decline phase,
NADH and NADPH may accumulate. This could suppress fermentation by diminishing the supply of the
requisite NADþ and NADPþ (see Fig. 7.20). The reincorporation and reduction of compounds such as acetaldehyde and acetic acid would help to oxidize these
reducing compounds, balancing the redox potential
and permitting continued fermentation.
The metabolic intermediates needed for cell growth
and maintenance are generally synthesized from components of the glycolytic and PPP pathways, and the
TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle (see Fig. 7.20). However,
during vinification, most TCA-cycle enzymes in mitochondrion are inactive. Isozymic versions of most of
these enzymes (located in the cytoplasm) take over the

90

225

80

200
Higher alcohols

70

175

60

150

50

125

40

100

30

75

Acetaldehyde

50

20
10

25

Acetoin

0
0 10 20 30 40 50

100

150

200

Milligrams per liter higher alcohols (as isoamyl)

Milligrams per liter acetaldehyde or acetoin

molecule, in contrast to the potential 24e34 ATPs
derived via respiration. Most ethanol produced during
fermentation escapes from the cell to accumulate in the
surrounding medium.
The low respiratory capacity of S. cerevisiae reflects its
limited ability to produce the requisite enzymes in the
presence of high sugar concentrations (glucose repression). The high proportion of glycolytic enzymes in
yeast cytoplasm (about 50% of the soluble protein content) clearly denotes the importance of fermentation to
wine yeasts (Hess et al., 1969). Yeasts show high rates
of glycolysis, usually about 200e300 mmol glucose/
min/g cell weight (de Deken, 1966). It is estimated that
about 85% of the sugars incorporated by S. cerevisiae
are used in energy (ATP) production (and correspondingly the release of ethanol), whereas only about 15%
are incorporated in biosynthetic reactions. Specific
values vary depending on the prevailing conditions during fermentation, and the number of cell divisions
involved in reaching a stationary population.
Although most fermentable sugars in juice or must
are metabolized via glycolysis, some are channeled
through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)
(Fig. 7.20, upper right). This diversion is important in
the production of pentose sugars needed for nucleic
acid synthesis. The PPP also generates the NADPH,
required to activate certain cellular functions such as
amino acid synthesis (Gancelos and Serrano, 1989).
Thus, amino acid availability in the juice can decrease
the need for, and activity of, PPP intermediates.

0
250

Grams sugar per liter fermented

FIGURE 7.21 Formation of acetaldehyde, acetoin, and higher alcohols during alcoholic fermentation The dynamics of the production of these
compounds varies considerably with the yeast strain. From Amerine, M.A., Joslyn, M.A., 1970. Table Wines, the Technology of Their Production, second
ed. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, reproduced by permission.

500

0.6

Grams per 100 mL acetic acid

0.05

Glycerol

0.04

0.5

0.4
Acetic acid

0.03

Fixed acids

0.02

0.3

0.2

0.01

0.1
2, 3-Butylene glycol

0

0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

Grams per 100 mL glycerol, 2,3–Butylene glycol
and fixed acids (succinic, lactic, and citric, as tartaric)

7. Fermentation

Grams sugar per liter fermented

FIGURE 7.22 Formation of acetic acid, glycerol, 2,3-butylene glycol, and fixed acids during alcoholic fermentation. The dynamics of the
production of these compounds varies with the strain. From Amerine, M.A., Joslyn, M.A., 1970. Table Wines, the Technology of Their Production, second
ed. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, reproduced by permission.

function of generating the necessary metabolic intermediates used in the biosynthesis of amino acids and nucleotides (see Fig. 7.20). Full operation of the TCA cycle
would produce an excess of NADH, disrupting the
redox balance. This is avoided because NADH, produced during the oxidation of citrate to succinate (the
“right-hand” side of the TCA cycle), can be oxidized
back to NADþ by reducing oxaloacetate to succinate
(the “left-hand” side of the TCA cycle). The result is
redox balance. In addition, NADH generated in glycolysis may be oxidized in the reduction of oxaloacetate
to succinate, rather than oxidize acetaldehyde to
ethanol. In both scenarios, excess succinate is generated.
This probably explains why succinate is one of the major
by-products of yeast fermentation. In yeasts, the PPP
functions primarily in the generation of particular
amino acids and pentose sugars involved in nucleotide
synthesis.
The replacement of TCA-cycle intermediates lost to
biosynthesis probably comes from pyruvate. Pyruvate
may be directly channeled through acetate carboxylated
to oxaloacetate or indirectly routed via the glyoxylate
pathway. The last pathway, if active, is probably functional only near the end of fermentation as glucose suppresses the glyoxylate pathway. The involvement of
biotin in the carboxylation of pyruvate to oxaloacetate
probably accounts for its primary requirement by yeast
cells.
The accumulation of another major by-product of
fermentation, glycerol, also has its origin in the need to
maintain a favorable redox balance. Its production is
also valuable as an osmoticum. In some strains, glycerol

accumulation appears to enhance the synthesis of another
osmoticum, trehalose (Li et al., 2010). The importance of
glycerol synthesis to redox balance is suggested by the
inability of mutants, defective in glycerol synthesis, to
grow under anaerobic conditions (Nissen et al., 2000).
In addition, Roustan and Sablayrolles (2002) present evidence supportive of the role of glycerol synthesis (at least
during the stationary phase) in eliminating excess
reducing power. The reduction of dihydroxyacetone
phosphate to glycerol 3-phosphate can oxidize the
NADH generated in the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3phosphate in glycolysis (Fig. 7.23. However, the coupling
of these two reactions does not generate ATP and is therefore an energy-neutral form of glucose fermentation. This

Fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate

Dihydroxyacetone phosphate

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
NAD+
NADH

Glycerol 3-phosphate

Glycerol (released)

1,3-bisphosphoglyceric acid

Pyruvate (metabolized)

Inorganic phosphate

FIGURE 7.23 Simplified pathway showing how NADH derived
from the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to 1,3bisphosphoglyceric acid is used in the reduction of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glycerol. As a consequence, NADH is unavailable to
reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol.

Alcoholic fermentation

is in contrast to the net production of two ATP molecules,
and release of CO2, during the fermentation of glucose to
ethanol. The separate functions of redox balance and
osmotolerance appear to be regulated by different isozymes of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, GPD1
and GPD2 (Ansell et al., 1997).
The presence of sulfur dioxide increases the production of glycerol. This probably comes as an indirect effect
of bonding with acetaldehyde. This limits its reduction
to ethanol, blocking the usual means by which alcoholic
fermentation regenerates NADþ.
Because of the changing conditions throughout batch
fermentation, yeast cells need to adjust their levels of
ATP and reducing power to synthesize necessary metabolic intermediates, while maintaining favorable redox
and ionic balances. Consequently, the concentration of
yeast by-products in the cytoplasm and juice changes
continuously throughout fermentation (see Figs. 7.22
and 7.23). Because several metabolic intermediates are
aromatic, for example acetic acid, acetoin (primarily by
conversion from diacetyl), and succinic acid, their presence can affect bouquet development. The accumulation
of acetyl CoA (as a result of limited activity of Krebs Cycle enzymes) may explain the accumulation and release
of acetate esters during fermentation. The alcoholysis of
acetyl CoA (and other acyl SCoA complexes) during
esterification would release CoA for other metabolic
functions. In addition, the formation of other aromatics,
notably higher alcohols, reflects the relative availability
of amino acids and other nitrogen sources in the juice.
Adequate availability permits amino acids to be used
as an energy source or generates organic acids, fatty
acids, and reduced-sulfur compounds.
Although all strains of S. cerevisiae possess the same
set of enzymes, their catalytic activities may vary due
to allelic differences. In addition, slight differences in
regulation or gene copy number mean that any two
strains are unlikely to respond identically under the
same conditions. This variability undoubtedly accounts
for many of the subtle (and not so subtle) differences between fermentations conducted by different strains. For
example, overexpression of cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase increases not only the accumulation of malic
acid, but also fumaric and citric acids (Pines et al., 1997).
In addition, overexpression of glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase not only results in marked increases in
glycerol production, but also augments the accumulation of acetaldehyde, pyruvate, acetate, 2,3-butanediol,
succinate, and especially acetoin (Michnick et al.,
1997). This is the mechanism by which glycerol production may be enhanced by heat shocking reactivated yeast
before inoculation (Berovic and Herga, 2007). The shift
in metabolism toward glycerol synthesis is of enologic
interest as it could result in more traditional alcohol contents in wines produced from grapes having high  Brix

501

values. This is becoming more common, as prolonged
growing seasons, associated with delayed harvest, can
lead to table wines possessing up to 15% ethanol.
Influence on grape constituents
Yeasts have their major effect on the sugar content of
juice or must. If fermentation goes to completion, only
minute amounts of fermentable sugars remain (1 g/
L). Small amounts of nonfermentable sugars, such as
arabinose, rhamnose, and xylose, also remain (w0.2 g/
L). These small quantities have no sensory significance,
leaving the wine tasting “dry.”
Yeasts may increase the pH by metabolizing malic
acid to lactic acid. However, the proportion converted
is highly variable, differing among strains by 3%e45%
(Rankine, 1966). Some strains of Saccharomyces paradoxus
can degrade malic acid up to 40% (Orlic et al., 2007). In
contrast, some strains of S. cerevisiae synthesize malic
acid (more so at warmer temperatures) (Farris et al.,
1989). This is more common a feature of S. bayanus var.
uvarum.
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, a common member of the
grape epiphytic flora, can completely decarboxylate malic acid to lactic acid (Benito et al., 2013). It also has the
potential to limit urea and alcohol accumulation. The
former reduces the potential for ethyl carbamate production and could limit alcohol accumulation in wines
made from overmature grapes. Nonetheless, this yeast
has been little used because its sensory impact has
generally, but not consistently, been viewed as negative.
The chemical reasons for this are unclear. Delaying its
inoculation until after S. cerevisiae has been active for
several days or has completed fermentation apparently
reduces its potential negative sensory impact (Carre
et al., 1983). Immobilization appears to be an alternative
and effective approach that does not spoil the wine’s
character (Silva et al., 2003). It also permits greater control over the degree of deacidification.
During fermentation, the release of alcohols and other
organics helps dissolve compounds from seeds and skins.
Quantitatively, the most significant chemicals extracted
are anthocyanins and various flavonoid phenolics,
notably tannins. The latter are partially dependent on
the solubilizing action of ethanol. Anthocyanin extraction
often reaches a maximum within 3e5 days, when the
alcohol content has reached about 5%e7% (Somers and
Pocock, 1986). As the alcohol concentration continues to
rise, color intensity may begin to fall. This can result
from the coprecipitation of anthocyanins with grape and
yeast cells to which they may bind. Nevertheless, the primary reason for color loss appears to be disruption of
weak anthocyanin complexes present in the juice. Freed
anthocyanins may convert into uncolored states.
Although extraction of tannins occurs more slowly, their
content often reaches higher values than anthocyanins.

502

7. Fermentation

Tannin extraction from stems (rachis), if present, may
reach a plateau after about 7 days. Seed tannins are the
slowest to be liberated; their accumulation may still be
active after several weeks (Siegrist, 1985).
Ethanol also aids the solubilization of certain aromatic compounds from grape cells. Unfortunately, little
is known about the dynamics of this process.
Conversely, ethanol decreases the solubility of other
grape constituents, notably pectins and other carbohydrate polymers. The pectin content may fall by upward
of 70% during fermentation.
As noted, the metabolic action of yeasts produces
many important wine volatiles, notably higher alcohols, fatty acids, and esters. Yeast metabolism may
also degrade some grape aromatics, notably aldehydes.
This potentially could limit the expression of the herbaceous odor generated by C6 aldehydes and alcohols
produced as a consequence of oxidation during the
grape crush. Yeasts can also influence wine flavor by
decarboxylating hydroxycinnamic acids to their equivalent vinylphenols. More significantly, fermentation
may play a major role in the liberation of varietal
aromatics, notably those bound in complexes with glycosides (Williams et al., 1996) or cysteine (Tominaga
et al., 1998). Because yeast strains differ significantly
in these attributes (Howell et al., 2004), strain choice
can either enhance, diminish, or modify varietal
expression.
Indirect effects of yeast action include wine color
modification (Eglinton et al., 2004; Medina et al.,
2005). This may involve pigment loss, by adherence to
grape cell remnants and yeast mannoproteins, or color
stabilization by the release of carbonyls, such as pyruvic acid and acetaldehyde, and the generation of vinylphenols. Because yeast strains vary in these
characteristics, strain selection can influence color
depth and stability in red wines (Bartowsky et al.,
2004b; Morata et al., 2006).

Yeasts
Classification and life cycle
Yeasts are a diverse group of fungi characterized by
possessing a unicellular growth habit. Cell division
may involve budding (extrusion of a daughter cell
from the mother cell) (Plate 7.6) or fission (division of
the mother cell into one or more cells by localized ingrowths). Occasionally, yeasts may form short chains.
Yeasts are also distinguished by possessing a single
nucleusdin contrast to the frequently variable number
of nuclei found most filamentous fungi. In addition,
the composition of their cell walls is unique. The major
fibrous cell-wall component of most fungi, chitin, occurs
only as a minor component in yeast cell walls. It is

PLATE 7.6 Scanning electron micrograph of Saccharomyces cervisiae. Photo courtesy Lallemand.

localized to the bud scar, the site where new (daughter)
cells originate. The major constituent of yeast cell walls
(b-1,3-D-glucans) consists of chains of glucose molecules. Also present are mannoproteins, complex polymers of the sugar, mannose and proteins. These are
covalently linked to either b-1,3-D-glucans or smaller
amounts of b-1,6-D-glucans.
Although characterized by a distinctive set of properties, yeasts are not a single evolutionary group. A
yeastlike growth habit has evolved independently in
at least three major fungal taxadthe Zygomycota,
Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota. Only yeast members
of the Ascomycota (and related imperfect forms) are
significant in wine production. Most imperfect yeasts
(those that have lost the ability to undergo sexual reproduction), are derived from ascomycete yeasts. Under
appropriate conditions, most ascomycete yeast cells
differentiate into ascidthe structures in which haploid
spores are produced through meiosis and cytoplasmic
division.
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae and related species, four
haploid spores are produced as a consequence of
meiosis (Fig. 7.24. After rupture of the ascal wall (originally the mother cell wall), spores typically germinate to
produce haploid vegetative cells. Those of opposite

FIGURE 7.24 Stages of yeast development. Left to right: budding
vegetative cells, ascospore development, spore release from ascus. A
yeast cell can reproduce vegetatively about 20 times before it dies.

Alcoholic fermentation

mating type usually fuse shortly after germination to
reestablish the diploid state. This fusion may occur
even before rupture of the ascal wall. Although individual cells only have the capacity to grow and bud about
eight times before dying, newly budded cells have the
same capacity as the mother celldto generate (bud)
eight new cells. Cellular death apparently results from
disruption caused by the accumulation of circular copies
of rDNA in the nucleus (Sinclair and Guarente, 1997).
Although possible, most Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine
strains rarely express this potential in must or wine.
Ascal development appears to be suppressed by high
concentrations of glucose, ethanol, and CO2.
If sporulation is desired, as in breeding experiments,
nutrient starvation, the addition of sodium acetate, or
both, can induce ascospore production in S. cerevisiae. Bicarbonate accumulation in the growth medium also acts
as a meiosis-promoting factor (Ohkuni et al., 1998).
Until the late 1970s, yeast classification was, by necessity, based on physiological properties and the few
morphological traits readily observable under the light
microscope. These have now been supplemented or
replaced with genomic analysis. These procedures will
hopefully usher in a period of more stable classification,
based on evolutionary relationships.
In most recent taxonomic treatments (e.g., Kurtzman
et al., 2011), many named species of Saccharomyces

503

have been reduced to synonymy. This does not refute
the differences that formerly were used to distinguish
“species,” but rather indicates that they were either
minor genetic variants or genetically unstable. Most
of these former species are viewed as physiological
races of recognized species or occasionally members
of different genera. For example, S. fermentati and S.
rosei are considered strains of Torulaspora delbrueckii.
Fig. 7.25 illustrates a modern interpretation of the
relatedness among Saccharomyces and related genera,
species, and strains.
S. cerevisiae and related species (Saccharomyces sensu
stricto) apparently evolved from an ancient chromosome doubling (autopolyploidy) (Wolfe and Shields,
1997; Wong et al., 2002). This was followed by inactivation or loss of most duplicate chromosomes (diploidization). Although this is estimated to have occurred
millions of years ago, hybridization and polyploidy
still occur within the genus (de Barros Lopes et al.,
2002; Naumova et al., 2005). For example, S. pastorianus
is an alloploid hybrid between S. cerevisiae and S.
eubayanus (Libkind et al., 2011). Appendix 7.1 provides
a list of accepted names and synonyms for yeasts
commonly found on grapes or in wine. Differences between some of the physiological races of S. cerevisiae
(formerly given species status) are noted in Appendix
7.2.

Saccharomyces
Kazachstania
Naumovozyma
Tetrapisispora
Vanderwaltozyma
Nakaseomyces
Zygosaccharomyces
Zygotorulaspora
Saccharomyces arboricolus CBS 10644T / EF580918 / EF580917
Torulaspora
Lachancea
T
61 Saccharomyces cariocanus Y-27337 / AF398478 / AY046147
Eremothecium
94
Kluyveromyces
Saccharomyces paradoxus Y-17217NT / AY048155 / AYO46148
Saccharomycodes
59
Hanseniaspora
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Y-12632NT / AY048154 / AY046146
70
50 changes
T

Saccharomyces mikatae Y-27341 / AF398479 / AY046149

Saccharomyces kudriavzevii Y-27339T / AF398480 / AY046150

100

T
72 Saccharomyces bayanus var: bayanus Y-12624 / AY048156 / AY046152

Saccharomyces pastorianus Y-27171NT / AY048172 / AY046151
98

Saccharomyces bayanus var. uvarum Y-17034T / AY130339 / AY130306
Kazachstania viticola Y-27206T / AF398482 / AY046162
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii Y-229NT / U72163 / AY046189

10 changes
FIGURE 7.25 Phylogenetic relationships among Saccharomyces spp. determined from maximum parsimony analysis of the combined sequences of the D1/D2 LSU rRNA gene and ITS. Species names are followed by CBS or NRRL strain accession numbers, and respectively the
GenBank accession numbers for D1/D2 and ITS. Bootstrap values given at the nodes are from 1000 replicates. T ¼ type strain, NT ¼ neotype
strain. The small tree, which shows relationships among genera, was determined from maximum parsimony analysis of combined sequences of
the nearly entire LSU rRNA, SSU rRNA and translation elongation factor-1a genes. Reprinted from Vaughan-Martini, A., Martini, A., 2011.
Saccharomyces Meyen ex Reess (1870). In: Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T. (Eds.), The Yeasts, a Taxonomic Study, fifth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp.
733e746, with permission from Elsevier.

504

7. Fermentation

Yeast identification
Identification procedures based on genomic analysis
permit the rapid (hours vs. days) identification of species,
even strains from small samples (Cocolin et al., 2000;
Martorell et al., 2005). The procedures are based primarily on ribosomal (rRNA) genes. These possess conserved
unique segmentsdtermed primers in polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) procedures. rRNA genes have the advantage over single-copy genes in that they occur in multiples (50e100 copies/cell), making the test more
sensitive. Real-time PCR procedures have the added
advantage that they can be used to both identify and
quantify species/strains from a site (Martorell et al.,
2005). Thus, investigations of yeast origin and activity
are now possible that were once too onerous (e.g., determining what strain(s) are conducting fermentation at any
point during the process as well as the dynamics of their
population fluctuations). These techniques have not only
been a boon to academic research, but also have spawned
renewed interest in endemic strains as potential sources
of regional typicity or site-specific (terroir) specificity
(Bokulich et al., 2014; Comitini et al., 2017).
Molecular techniques are also particularly useful in
the early detection of potential spoilage organisms.
They are also being applied to assessing the dynamics
of physiological changes during fermentation. Regrettably, these procedures are costly, technically demanding,
and currently only available in research centers, commercial laboratories, or the largest of wineries.
Alternative techniques for the differentiation between
fermentative and spoilage yeasts involve free fatty acid
analysis, gas chromatography, or pulsed-field electrophoresis. However, these are equally unavailable to the
vast majority of wineries. Computer-based analysis of
data via synoptic keys, in contrast to structured dichotomous keys (Payne, 1998), would facilitate identification
using standard culture techniques. In their absence,
specialized culturing procedures, such as those given
by Cavazza et al. (1992), or the standard methods noted
in Kurtzman et al. (2011), are effective but not speedy.
Traditional identification required the isolation of single cells, and their reproduction on culture media. This
typically involved dilution from the source, usually containing upward of millions of cells/mL. Selective media
also often was required for the isolation and culture of
different species. Identification was based primarily on
the capacity to grow with or without particular nutrients. Depending on how isolation is done, estimates of
the number of viable (culturable) cells of each species
and strain could be obtained. However, just because an
organism is isolated does not necessarily mean that it
was growing or physiologically active in the juice,
must, or wine. Conversely, inability to culture an

organism does not necessarily mean it was not present
in a viable state or was metabolically inactive. Yeasts
may survive for extended periods in a dormant (unculturable) state (Cocolin and Mills, 2003).
Because of the time, equipment, and experience
required in the effective use of even traditional identification techniques, this was often beyond the capacity of
most wineries. Except for large wineries, yeast identification has typically been contracted out to commercial
laboratories.
Another complexity re identification, unrelated to
isolation or identifying issues, relates to how yeast (or
other microbial) species are delimited. Because it is,
and may always remain, a taxonomic conundrum, shifts
in yeast nomenclature may continue to be perplexing
and frustrating forever. Contributing to confusion for
the newcomer is the alternative use of a yeast’s teleomorphic (sexual) and anamorphic (asexual) name (e.g.,
Dekkera vs. Brettanomyces).
Yeast evolution and grape flora
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is undoubtedly the most
important yeast species. In various forms, it functions
as the wine yeast, brewer’s yeast, distiller’s yeast, and
baker’s yeast (Fay et al., 2019). In addition, laboratory
strains are extensively used in industry and in fundamental studies on genetics, biochemistry, and molecular
biology. For all its importance, the natural habitat of
S. cerevisiae is only beginning to be suspected with
some certainty. Current evidence indicates that its indigenous niche is the sap, bark and acorns of oak trees,
other members of the Fagaceae, and adjacent soil (Peter
et al., 2018). In these sites, it may co-inhabit with its most
closely related species, S. paradoxus. The latter has often
been viewed as the progenitor of S. cerevisiae. This view
is supported by their extensive genetic and physiological similarities, equivalent natural habitats, and ability
to ferment wines to dryness (Redzepovic et al., 2002).
Nonetheless, the two species appear not to exchange
genes due to DNA mismatch repair systems. Other
Saccharomyces species that may occur sympatrically
with S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus are S. kudriavzevii
and S. uvarum) (Sampaio and Gonçalves, 2008).
Wild strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
S. paradoxus differ primarily by possessing genomic
sequence divergence; showing different thermal growth
profiles; and being reproductively isolated (i.e., having
an inability to mate under natural conditions). They
also vary in that wild strains of S. cerevisiae demonstrate
limited genetic distinction across continents, versus partial reproductive isolation between dispersed populations of S. paradoxus (Sniegowski et al., 2002; Kuehne
et al., 2007). Wild strains of S. cerevisiae are

Alcoholic fermentation

distinguishable from wine strains by being prototrophic
and sporulation-proficient. In contrast, wine strains
exhibit less genetic diversity, show variation in ploidy,
aneuploidy, and genomic introgressions (Peter et al.,
2018) (Almeida et al., 2015; Fig. 9.36). Attributes adapting wine strains to being effective fermentative organism apparently arose from insertions derived from
other yeasts (Fig. 7.26 (e.g., S. uvarum and
S. eubayanus). These properties include more rapid
growth, improved nitrogen utilization, and enhanced
resistance to copper and sulfites (see Marsit and Dequin,
2015). They also differ in the aromatic aspects they
donate to wines: wild versions generating earthy and
sulfurous attributes, whereas wine strains yield fruity/
floral characteristics (Hyma et al., 2011).
Although Saccharomyces cerevisiae had been isolated
from fruit flies, bees and wasps, their importance in
the yeast life cycle of yeast was unknown. Recent studies
have demonstrated that they may have been instrumental in some of the genome introgressions noted
above. In the case of social wasps, they act as a site for
sexual gene transfer (Stefanini et al., 2016). Insects as
well as birds can act as dispersal agents.

FIGURE 7.26 The emergence of domesticated Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains (red) from wild Mediterranean oak populations
(green), according to Almeida et al. (2015). Domestication probably
took place 1000e11,000 YBP, creating a bottleneck event (effective
population size, Ne, reduction) and initiating the divergence between
the two populations. Wine strains inherited genomic elements
providing enhanced wine characteristics (yellow stars) by horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) from other fungi. Progressive divergence between
wild and wine populations was accompanied by limited gene flow,
mostly from the wild into wine populations (green arrows) followed by
continuous population size increase (proportional to branch width)
From Eberlein, C., Leducq, J.-B., Landry, C.R., 2015. The genomics of wild
yeast populations sheds light on the domestication of man’s best (micro)
friend. Molec. Ecol., 24, 5309e5311, reproduced with permission of John
Wiley & Sons.

505

In spite of the association of S. cerevisiae with wine, it
is usually absent or rare on healthy grapes. Even in longestablished vineyards, the isolation of S. cerevisiae (in
small numbers) occurs only near the end of ripening.
Mortimer and Polsinelli (1999) estimate about one
healthy berry per 1000 carries wine yeasts. However,
on surface-damaged fruit, the frequency may rise to
one in four (1  105 to 1  106 yeast cells/berry). In
Croatia, Redzepovic et al. (2002) found that
S. paradoxus was more frequently found on grapes
than S. cerevisiae. A comparison of the attributes contributed to wine by S. paradoxus versus S. cerevisiae is provided by Majdak et al. (2002) and Orlic et al. (2010).
A related species, Saccharomyces bayanus, can also
conduct effective alcoholic fermentations. Nevertheless,
they are less encountered, and their use typically associated with special winemaking situations. For example,
S. bayanus var. bayanus has properties especially well
adapted to the production of sparkling wines and fino
sherries. S. bayanus is also well adapted to fermenting
white wines from relatively neutral flavored grapes
grown in warm climates. It tends to produce little volatile acidity, augments glycerol as well as malic and succinic acid contents, and generates more aromatic
alcohols and ethyl esters (Castellari et al., 1994; Antonelli
et al., 1999). For cool fermentations (below 15 C), cryotolerant S. bayanus var. uvarum is of particular value. It is
often involved in the production of tokaji, amarone,
and sauternes wines. In some regions, such as Alsace,
it has been reported to be the predominant fermentative
yeast (Demuyter et al., 2004). The origin of the species
(often considered subspecies of S. cerevisiae) is unknown,
as are their natural habitats. Wild strains have occasionally been isolated from the caddis fly, some mushroom
species, and hornbeam tree exudate (Carpinus).
Attribute tendencies of different species, subspecies,
and strains have been investigated, but these are often
significantly influence by the conditions of fermentation
and the chemical composition of the juice/must. Thus,
precise prediction of their actions under specific conditions of a particular vintage is impossible. Individual
experimentation under in-house conditions and over
several years is the only way of assessing the suitability
of any strain or strains.
Although wine yeasts rarely occur in significant
numbers on the fruit, leaves, or stems of grapevines,
other yeasts are frequently found. These include species
of Hanseniospora (Kloeckera), Candida, Pichia, Hansenula,
Metschnikowia, Sporobolomyces, Cryptococcus, Rhodotorula,
and Aureobasidium. Their population numbers change
during fruit ripening (Renouf et al., 2005), increasing
markedly during the last few weeks of maturation.
Endemic yeasts may be found on the fruit pedicel, but
occur more frequently on its callused terminal ends,
the receptacle. Yeasts are most frequently isolated from

506

7. Fermentation

around stomata on the fruit or next to cracks in the
cuticle, where they form small colonies (Belin, 1972).
They presumably grow on nutrients seeping out of
openings in the fruit, receptacle, and pedicel. Yeasts do
not grow on the plates of wax that cover much of the
berry surface, the matte-like bloom. In fact, yeasts cease
to grow where they come in contact with the waxy cuticular plates.
Commonly, the cells are dormant or only slowly
reproducing. This unquestionably results from the typically dry state of the cuticle. Microbes require at least a
thin coating of water to be metabolically active. This occurs only during rainy spells or when fog or dew condenses on grape surfaces. In contrast, damaged fruit
surfaces, where juice may escape, may be slightly hygroscopic, providing a more favorable, albeit highly osmotic, site for yeast (and bacterial) growth.
As noted, grapes do not appear to have been the natural (ancestral) habitat for S. cerevisiae (or its progenitor).
Nonetheless, winery equipment, and the winery itself,
can act as a significant inoculum source for spontaneous
fermentations (Ciani et al., 2004; Santamarı́a et al., 2005).
This is suggested by the repeat isolation of one or a few
dominant strain(s) from particular wineries. Outside the
winery, strain spread seems limited, and occurs only
over short distances (Valero et al., 2005). A possible
exception occurs where pomace is spread as a vineyard
soil conditioner. In addition, regional strains isolated
from vineyards often differ (Khan et al., 2000). Thus,
this lends credence to the view that endemic yeast populations could contribute to a site’s regional character.
The most frequently occurring yeast species on
mature grapes is Kloeckera apiculata. In warm regions,
the perfect state of Kloeckera (Hanseniaspora) tends to
replace the asexual form. Filamentous fungi, such as
Aspergillus, Botrytis, Penicillium, Plasmopara, and Uncinula, are rarely isolated, except from diseased or
damaged fruit. Similarly, acetic acid bacteria are usually
found in significant numbers only on diseased or
damaged fruit.
Under most conditions, especially where must is
inoculated with a particular strain of S. cerevisiae, the
indigenous yeast flora has often been viewed as of little
significance. The acidic, highly osmotic conditions of
grape juice were thought to retard the growth of most
epiphytic yeasts, fungi, and bacteria. Also, the rapid
development of anaerobic conditions and the accumulation of ethanol compromise the growth of most potentially competitive species. Nevertheless, in musts low
in sugar content, the activity of yeasts less tolerant of
high sugar and ethanol contents may be important
(Ciani and Picciotti, 1995). Diseased grapes also have
significantly modified and enhanced populations of
the epiphytic flora. These can markedly affect the
outcome of fermentation, even with inoculation.

Even on healthy grapes, other yeasts may occur at
concentrations approaching those typically used in
inoculated
fermentations
(105e106
cells/mL)
(Fig. 7.28). Molecular evidence indicates that they
may continue to persist in a viable, but unculturable
state, throughout fermentation (Cocolin and Mills,
2003). At present, it is not established how commonly
or for how long these species remain metabolically
active (Millet and Lonvaud-Funel, 2000). Thus, their
significance to vinification remains uncertain, and
possibly underestimated. However, in some instances,
they maintain or increase their numbers during
fermentation (Mora and Mulet, 1991; Fig. 7.27). This appears to be more common when fermentation temperatures are low (Heard and Fleet, 1988), or yeast
inoculation is delayed (Petering et al., 1993). Why this
occurs is uncertain, but may relate to the influence of
killer yeasts in the grape or winery flora (Maqueda
et al., 2012). Only in diseased or damaged grapes is
the microbial grape flora clearly known to play an
important role in vinification.
In addition to the epiphytic yeast inoculum, juice and
must may become inoculated from winery equipment
(notably crushers, presses, and sumps) and the winery
environment (Ocón et al., 2010). This is especially true
in old wineries, in which the equipment and buildings
are thinly covered with wine yeasts. In addition, Hansenula anomala and Pichia membranaefaciens commonly
occur in wineries, with Brettanomyces and Aureobasidium
pullulans often being isolated from the walls of moist cellars. The hygienic operation of present-day wineries
greatly limits juice and must inoculation or contamination from the winery and its equipment. In such situations, the vineyard is presumably the main source of
S. cerevisiae in spontaneous fermentations (Török et al.,
1996).
Succession during fermentation
In spontaneous fermentations, there is a rapid and
early succession of yeast species. Initially, Kloeckera apiculata and Candida stellata may occur in the range of
103e106 cells/mL. This number increases rapidly if
grapes or must are left at warm temperatures.
Although these endemic yeasts may grow at the beginning of fermentation, most strains soon pass into
decline, with culturable numbers becoming but a minor
component of the yeast population. This has frequently
been interpreted as a result of the increasing concentration of ethanol produced by Saccharomyces, and/or the
addition of sulfur dioxide. Nonetheless, other interstrain and interspecies effects and influences may also
play a role. Examples may involve the selective action
of acetaldehyde (Cheraiti et al., 2005), and their relative
abilities to translocate glucose into the cell (Nissen
et al., 2004).

Alcoholic fermentation

Log cells per ml

(A)

9

6

3

0

Log cells per mL

(B) 9
6

3

0

Log cells per mL

(C) 9
6

3

0

Log cells per mL

(D) 9
6

3

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Fermentation time (days)

FIGURE 7.27

Yeast numbers during fermentation of white (AeB)
and red (CeD) wines. B, Saccharomyces cerevisiae; C, Kloeckera apiculata; ,, Candida stellata; -, C. pulcherrima; :, C. colliculosa; O, Hansenula anomala. The initial population of S. cerevisiae comes
predominantly from the inoculation conducted in the fermentations.
From Heard, G.M., Fleet, G.H., 1985. Growth of natural yeast flora during
the fermentation of inoculated wines. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 50,
727e728, reproduced by permission.

During the initial stage of fermentation, the activities
of non-Saccharomyces yeasts contribute to the production
of compounds such as acetic acid, glycerol, and various
esters (Ciani and Maccarelli, 1998; Romano et al., 2003).
This can be sufficiently significant to influence the
wine”s aroma (Eglinton et al., 2000; Soden et al., 2000).
For example, some strains of Kloeckera apiculata can

507

produce up to 25 times the amounts of acetic acid
typically produced by S. cerevisiae. K. apiculata, along
with other members of the grape epiphytic flora,
may also produce above-threshold amounts of 2aminoacetophenone. This compound has been associated with the naphthalene-like odor characteristic of
untypical aging (Sponholz and Hühn, 1996). In addition,
K. apiculata may inhibit some S. cerevisiae strains from
completing fermentation (Velázquez et al., 1991),
possibly due its production of acetic acid, octanoic and
decanoic acids, or “killer” factors. In addition, the indigenous grape flora may enhance amino acid availability
by their proteolytic activities (Dizy and Bisson, 2000).
At cool fermentation temperatures (10 C), yeasts such
as K. apiculata may remain active (or at least viable)
throughout alcoholic fermentation (Heard and Fleet,
1988; Erten, 2002).
Occasionally, strains of Candida stellata persist in fermenting juice (Fleet et al., 1984). Their ability to produce
high concentrations of glycerol could play a role in
enhancing a wine’s smooth mouthfeel. Jolly et al.
(2003) report that the perceived quality of Chenin Blanc
wine was increased when Candida pulcherrima was combined with Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Torulaspora delbrucecki also has the potential to positively influence the
sensory properties of wine, due to its low production
of acetic acid and synthesis of succinic acid. Although
Kloeckera apiculata and C. stellata typically ferment only
up to approximately 4% and 10% alcohol, respectively,
they are able to survive much higher alcohol concentrations (Gao and Fleet, 1988).
Of equal or possibly greater significance is the property of some Hanseniaspora, Debaryomyces, and Dekkera
spp. to produce glycosidases (Villena et al., 2007). Their
action in releasing terpenoids and other volatiles could
positively affect the development of the varietal character of a wine. The role of their other enzymatic activities on flavor development is largely unknown, except
for the negative influence of Dekkera spp.dits decarboxylation of hydroxycinnamic acids generating 4ethylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol.
Nonetheless, most members of the grape flora are
either slow growing or typically suppressed by the
low pH, high initial osmolarity of the juice/must, the
ferment’s augmenting ethanol content, oxygen deficiency, and/or sulfur dioxide. Their relative inability
to incorporate glucose under vinous conditions may
also play a significant role in their early demise (Nissen
et al., 2004). Consequently, most species of Candida,
Pichia, Cryptococcus, and Rhodotorula probably do not
contribute significantly to fermentation. Their populations seldom rise above 104 cells/mL, and the species
usually disappear quickly from the ferment. However,
if warm conditions prevail, and active fermentation is
delayed, these yeasts may initiate severe spoilage.

508

7. Fermentation

Under such conditions, Pichia guilliermondii has the potential to produce sufficient 4-ethylphenol to generate
odors variously described as burnt beans, band-aid,
wet dog, horse sweat, and barnyard (Barata et al., 2006).
Because of their potential to affect wine quality (Egli
et al., 1998), there is increasing interest among winemakers in using endemic yeasts to give their wines
distinctiveness (Fig. 7.28). Nevertheless, as with any
technique, it needs to be used with discretion and
tempered with experience. For example, cool fermentation without sulfur dioxide runs the risk that nonSaccharomyces yeast may dominate fermentation,
generating sufficient acetic acid and fusel alcohols to
mask grape varietal aromas. In addition, other yeasts
can lead to stuck fermentation, especially under stressful vinifications (Ciani et al., 2006).
The few bacteria able to grow in juice or must are
usually inhibited by Saccharomyces cerevisiae, with the
exception of lactic acid bacteria. Thus, S. cerevisiae (or
occasionally other Saccharomyces spp.) find few if any
organisms capable of competing with them in grape
must. Not surprisingly, S. cerevisiae tends to dominate
and complete fermentation, even when its initial presence in must is rare (less than 1/5000 colonies), as in
many spontaneous fermentations (Holloway et al.,
1990). Subsequently, however, other yeasts may
multiply in association with lactic acid bacteria during
or following malolactic fermentation, notably Pichia
spp. (Fleet et al., 1984).
Several investigations indicate that local populations
of S. cerevisiae are heterogeneous, consisting of many
Apple
Melon

Spicy

H 2S

Pear

Paper

Sweaty

Oxidized

FIGURE 7.28

The effect of spontaneous (dashed line) and induced
(thick solid line) fermentation on the sensory characteristics of Riesling
wine; thin solid line, mean score. From Henick-Kling, T., Edinger, W.,
Daniel, P., Monk, P., 1998. Selective effects of sulfur dioxide and yeast starter
culture addition on indigenous yeast populations and sensory characteristics
of wine. J. Appl. Microbiol. 84, 865e876, reproduced by permission.

strains, differing considerably even among regional
wineries (Bokulich et al., 2014). Although their numbers
are usually low, they may occasionally reach 104e105
cells/mL, possibly derived from winery equipment or
as residents on damaged grapes. There may also be
shifts in their dominance from year to year (Bokulich
et al., from site to site (Guillamón et al., 1996), and across
the vine (Polsinelli et al., 1996).
If the must is inoculated, the strain typically comes to
dominate fermentation. Nonetheless, members of the
grape flora and winery may influence the wine’s character (Bokulich et al., 2013), even if they remain metabolically active for only a few days (Querol et al.,
1992). However, occasionally they remain at high populations throughout fermentation (Fig. 7.27A). Shifts in
population numbers may also occur throughout
fermentation when must is inoculated with several
strains (Schütz and Gafner, 1993a; Sipiczki et al.,
2004). Because of the low incidence of sexual recombination, infrequent ascospore production, and poor
ascospore viability, it is suspected that mitotic recombination and mutation are the primary sources of this
variability (Puig et al., 2000). However, strain selection
in an existing heterogenous population could be at
work as well.
Must inoculation
During inoculation, sufficient Saccharomyces cerevisiae
is added to reach a population of about 105e106 cells/
mL. With active dry yeasts, this is equivalent to about
0.1e0.2 g/L of juice/must. Active dry yeast often contains about 20e30  109 cells/g. In its production, the
culture is treated so that the cells possess adequate
amounts of protein, ergosterol, unsaturated fatty acids,
and reserve materials for several divisions. Principal
among the latter is trehalose, important in providing
resistance to both drying and rehydration.
Inoculation is particularly common in the production
of white wine, due to its lower nutrient status and yeast
population (short maceration followed by clarification),
and cool fermentation temperature. The different processes involved in red wine production mean inoculation is less necessary (i.e., fermentation with the
pomace, warmer fermentation temperatures, possibility
of some aeration during pumping over). Nonetheless,
inoculation still has significant benefits in assuring a
clean, predictable fermentation. With stuck fermentations, inoculation is essential.
Before addition, the inoculum is placed in water or
dilute juice. Rehydration is recommended to occur at
about 37 C for 20 min (details depending on the strain
and supplier). Supplementation of the rehydration medium with small amounts of sterols (often in the form
of yeast cell fragments) (Soubeyrand et al., 2005)
increases both yeast viability and improves their

509

Alcoholic fermentation

fermentative ability. A short interval at 25 C before inoculation also improves survival, during which damaged
cytoplasmic and membrane structures (Beker and Rapoport, 1987) are repaired and metabolism adjusts to the
new conditions. This is important before the cells are
exposed to the full osmotic potential of grape must.
Readaptation occurs progressively (Fig. 7.29) and is estimated to involve about 2000 genes (Rossignol et al.,
2006). Inoculation of cool musts requires even longer
and progressive adaptation. Fractional addition of
further juice, before final incorporation of the inoculum
into the must, avoids rapid temperature changes and
promotes retention of high cell viability.
Specific strains of S. cerevisiae first became commercially available in the 1950s, with development of active
dry by the mid-sixties. They possess a wide range of
characteristics, suitable for almost any winemaking situations. These include those that enhance varietal flavorants (e.g., releasing thiols from glycosidic or
cysteinylated/glutathionylated complexes) (Holt et al.,
2011); secrete acid proteases (potentially valuable in
achieving protein stability) (Younes et al., 2011); synthesize varying amounts of HSPs; produce an abundance of
fruit esters (especially valuable in fermenting neutral
flavored cultivars); are of neutral character (allowing
the varietal character to be highlighted); or possess
high
hydroxycinnamate
decarboxylase
activity
(enhancing the formation of stable pyranoanthocyanin
pigments). Strains are also available that are notable
for their production of low levels of acetic acid,
hydrogen sulfide, or urea. Others may be chosen
because of their relative fermentation speed; their ability
to synthesize or degrade malic or lactic acid; their ability
to augment the concentration of glycerol; their ability to
restart stuck fermentations; or their known value in

Reference
stage
17 h

Stage 0 h

20
Cells 106/mL or
CO2 (g/L)

0.5

Dry yeasts (–30 min)

0.4

Stage 1 h
15

0.3

Stage 6 h

10

0.2

5

0.1

0

0
–1

2

5

8
11
Time (hours)

14

17

20

dCO2/dt (g/L/h)

25

producing particular wine styles, notably carbonic
maceration, late-harvest, or early- versus late-maturing
reds. Yeast strain can also affect anthocyanin uptake
and color stability (e.g., Pinot noir, Carew et al., 2013).
In addition, there are locally selected strains that are reported to produce regionally distinctive wines.
Despite all the apparent phenotypic differences, most
commercial strains are almost genetically identical (Borneman et al., 2016). Admittedly, unsuspected epistatic
modifications may be generating known differences
(e.g., competitiveness under winemaking conditions,
Garcı́a-Rı́os et al., 2014). Nonetheless, the winemaker’s
choice is far from simple. In addition, much information
is anecdotal. Suppliers provide data and suggestions on
the various species and strains they provide, but crosscomparison between strains is fraught with difficulty,
combined with the knowledge that local conditions
often are pivotal in feature expression. Thus, it is again
up to the winemaker to do their own experimentation
to determine what best suits their needs and situations.
Figs. 7.30 and 7.31 give an indication of sensory differences yeast strains may engender.
In only a few instances is inoculation absolutely
essential. With thermovinification or pasteurized juice,
most of the endogenous yeast population has been
killed, requiring inoculation to achieve rapid initiation
of fermentation. In addition, inoculation is necessary to
restart “stuck” fermentations, and to promote fermentation of juice containing a significant number of moldy
grapes. Moldy grapes generally possess various inhibitors, such as acetic acid, that slow yeast growth and
metabolism. Finally, inoculation is required to assure
the initiation of the second fermentation in sparkling
wine production. However, the predominant reason
for using a specific yeast strain or strains is to avoid

FIGURE 7.29 Evolution of cell population
and fermentation parameters during and after
rehydration of active dry yeasts: dashed line,
cell population; burgundy solid line, fermentation rate; C, cumulated CO2 released. Reprinted
from Rossignol, T., Postaire, O., Storai, J., Blondin,
B., 2006. Analysis of the genomic response of a wine
yeast to rehydration and inoculation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 71, 699e712, with kind permission
of Springer Scientific and Business Media.

510

7. Fermentation

FIGURE 7.30 Comparative aromas of Shiraz wines after fermentation with AWRI 796 and BP 725. The ranking system was designed with one
being the lowest intensity and six being the highest. From Walsh, T., Heinrich, A., Skurray, G., 2006. Yeast contributes to Shiraz aroma and flavour. Aust.
NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 513, 78e80, reproduced with permission.
FIGURE 7.31 Profile of aroma of a Riesling
Citrus
wine (after 20 months) fermented with different Tropical fruit 1.0
yeast strains. From Dumont, A., Dulau, L., 1996. Peach/apricot
The role of yeasts in the formation of wine flavors. In: Orange peel
Herbal
Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool
0.5
Climate Vitic. Enol. New York State Agricultural
Experimental Station, Geneva, NY. pp. VIe24e28,
reproduced by permission.
0.0

1a/1b Simi white
2a/2b CS-2
3a/3b VL-1
4a/4b K1
5a/5b CEG

Principal axis 2
(20%)

3a

3b

2a

1a

2b

4b
4a

Grassy
Floral
Honey
Pine
Citrus

1b

5b

–0.5
5a
–1.0
–1.0

–0.5

Earthy
Floral
Honeysuckle
Tropical fruit
Talc

the production of undesirable flavors occasionally associated with spontaneous fermentations.
Spontaneous versus induced fermentation
There has been much discussion over the years concerning the relative merits of spontaneous versus
induced fermentation. That different strains of

0.0
Principal axis 1
(45%)

0.5

1.0
Reduced
Musty
Asparagus
Jasmine
Honey

Saccharomyces cerevisiae supply distinctive sensory attributes is indisputable. This is particularly important
for aromatically neutral cultivars. Their use may also
play an increasingly important role in restricting the
undesirably higher alcohol potentials of lateharvested grapes (Donaldson, 2008). Yeast strains
differ significantly in ethanol production under

Alcoholic fermentation

identical conditions. In addition, strain choice can
equally affect the varietal character of aromatically
distinctive cultivars, by influencing the liberation or
synthesis of specific grape flavorants (Ugliano et al.,
2006). These influences not only affect the sensory attributes of young wines, but are still detectable after
3 years (King et al., 2011). This may be even more significant with non-Saccharomyces yeasts. They appear to
have greater activity in breaking glycosidic bonds
(Mendes-Ferreira et al., 2001). These effects can be
further modified or enhanced by sur lies maturation.
Regrettably, our knowledge of the chemical origin of
their sensory effects is insufficient to permit prediction of results. Nevertheless, using established strains
provides the winemaker with the greatest confidence
that fermentation will initiate rapidly, go to completion cleanly (diminishing the possibility of undesirable microbial activity, disruption from killer factors,
or must oxidation), and possess relatively predictable
flavor and quality attributes.
In contrast, spontaneous fermentations may accentuate yearly variations in character. Capitalizing on
the mystic of vintage and terroir uniqueness is part
of the marketing strategy of many producers. Spontaneous fermentations are often promoted as a means of
generating greater aromatic complexity. Whether this
is valid or not depends on the perceiver. It is
commonly viewed by wine writers, and some wine
professionals, to be of significance to the consumer.
Nonetheless, for such yeast-derived attributes to be
of legitimate relevance, their influence should be
consistent, distinguishable, and recognizable by the
consumer (a dubious conjecture). Implying uniqueness may have sales value at the winery or for
wines produced at sites with a well-established international reputation. However, it is probably unrealistic to expect that most consumers can detect,
appreciate, or value such nebulous differences. Even
if statistically significant, they may be sensorially
irrelevant. What may be more important is that wine
critics think they can and promulgate that impression.
Perception of reality is often more important than
reality itself.
Although spontaneous fermentation can influence a
wine’s sensory character (Hernández-Orte et al., 2008;
Varela et al., 2009), there is risk that these may be offodors and other undesirable sensory attributes. For
example, the activity of Kloeckera and Hanseniaspora
can increase the incidence of nonprotein haze formation (Dizy and Bisson, 2000). Spontaneous fermentations associated with oxidative yeasts are also
frequently associated with higher concentrations of
volatile acidity and ethyl acetate (Salvadores et al.,

511

1993). They also tend to possess noticeable lag periods
(most likely due to the low S. cerevisiae inoculum) and
thus be more susceptible to disruption by killer factors
(see below) or suppression by other yeast species.
Those who favor spontaneous fermentation believe
that the endemic grape flora supplies a desired subtle
or regional character (Mateo et al., 1991), supposedly
missing with induced fermentations. For large-scale
wineries, where brand-name consistency is important,
the risks of spontaneous fermentation outweigh its potential advantages. Even induced fermentations are
not pure-culture fermentations, and correspondingly
run the hazards of an indigenous microbial flora. Juice
and must always contain sizable populations of
epiphytic yeasts and bacteria, unless pasteurized or
treated to thermovinification.
An alternative to either spontaneous or inoculated
fermentation is coinoculation with a mix of local and
commercial yeast strains. The combination may
diminish individual differences, producing a more
consistent but still distinctive character (Fig. 7.32).
Alternatively Saccharomyces cerevisiae may be jointly
inoculated with species, such as Candida stellata (Soden
et al., 2000), Hanseniaspora vineae (Medina et al., 2013),
Debaryomyces vanriji (Garcia et al., 2002), Kluyveromyces
marxianus (Rollero et al., 2018), or Pichia kluyveri
(Anfang et al., 2009). Each has unique metabolic attributes that may provide specific benefits to the resultant
wine. For example, K. marxianus possesses pectinase activity, while P. kluyveri facilitates the liberation of the
aromatically significant thiol, 3-mercaptohexyl.
Because the interaction between species is often strain
specific (Wang et al., 2016), individual testing is
required to determine how they influence each other
under local conditions.
The activity and survival of members of a mixture is
highly dependent on a variety of factors, notably species and temperature (Fig. 7.33). Aeration of the must
also favors the prolonged activity of non-Saccharomyces
yeasts (Hansen et al., 2001). Because joint inoculation
may result in partial suppression of one or more of
the strains or species, sequential inoculation of nonSaccharomyces species, followed by later inoculation
with Saccharomyces cerevisiae, may be required (Languet
et al., 2005; Raynal et al., 2011). This generates, under
semicontrolled conditions, a sequence that may
resemble spontaneous fermentation.
As noted earlier, on-site experimentation is the only
sure means of determining the value of any practice.
The metabolic products released by any strain, species,
or their combination depends largely on the specific
fermentation conditions (Thorngate, 1998; Regodón
Mateos et al., 2006).

512

7. Fermentation

FIGURE 7.32 Descriptive analysis of wines using
the three fermentation treatments with a trained panel.
Descriptors are shown as mean rating of aroma attributes with significant differences for secondary tier
descriptors (shown in upper case) and tertiary tier
descriptors (shown in lower case) for commercial,
spontaneous and Hanseniaspora vineae cofermentation.
From Medina, K., Boido, E., Fariña, L., Bioia, O., Gomez,
M.E., Barquet, M. et al., 2013. Increased flavor diversity of
Chardonnay wines by spontaneous fermentation and cofermentation with Hanseniaspora vineae. Food Chem.
141, 2513e2521, reproduced by permission of Elsevier.

Commercial
Spontaneous

FRESH FRUITS
Wood

8,0

Banana

7,0

** Yeast

White prune **

6,0
5,0

Butter

Pear**

4,0
3,0
2,0

**Houney

Apple

1,0
0,0

CITRIC FRUITS**

Caramel
Green papper

Lemon

Cut grass

Grape fruit
Guava

Log cells per ml

8

CofermH. vineae

10°C

20°C

Kiwi**

Pineapple

**<0.05

25°C

6
4
2
0
00

2

4

6

8

2
4
6
8 10
10 0
Fermentation time (days)

2

4

6

8

10

FIGURE 7.33 Growth of yeast species during mixed culture fermentation of Chardonnay grape juice (pH 3.5) at 10 C, 20 C, and 25 C: B,

Saccharomyces cerevisiae; C, Kloeckera apiculata; O , Candida stellata; ,, Candida krusei; :, Hansenula anomala. From Fleet, G.H., Heard, G.M.,
Gao, C., 1989. The effect of temperature on the growth and ethanol tolerance of yeasts during wine fermentation. Yeast 5, S43eS46, reproduced by
permission.

Another choice for winemakers searching to add a
distinctive aspect to their wine is to use cryotolerant
yeasts, notably S. bayanus var. uvarum. It is characterized
not only by its ability to ferment at cold temperatures
(Fig. 7.34), but also by its potential to direct the development of desirable sensory characteristics. For example,
cryotolerant yeasts generally produce higher concentrations of glycerol, succinic acid, 2-phenethyl alcohol, and
isoamyl and isobutyl alcohols; synthesize malic acid;
and produce less acetic acid than many mesophilic
S. cerevisiae strains (Castellari et al., 1994; Massoutier
et al., 1998).
Although different strains, species, and their combination can affect the sensory attributes of wines, until
recently the question of whether these differences

affected consumer preference had not been studied. Under laboratory conditions, a relatively recent study obtained an affirmative answer (King et al., 2010).
Whether such investigations reliably predict consumer
purchase behavior is unestablished.
Yeast breeding
Genetically, Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the best understood eukaryote, having been used for decades as
a favorite laboratory organism. It is easily cultured
and has a comparatively small genome (w13,000 kb),
possessing relatively little repetitive DNA and few introns. The complete genome of a laboratory strain
was deciphered in 1997, indicating that it possessed
about 5800 protein-coding genes, located on 16

Alcoholic fermentation

(A) 12

Genetic modification

Ethanol vol. %

10
8
6
4
2
0
0

20

40
Time (days)

60

80

0

20

40
Time (days)

60

80

(B) 12
10
Ethanol vol. %

513

8
6
4
2
0

FIGURE 7.34 Fermentation curves at six different temperatures
(þ, 6 C; :, 12 C; , 18 C; A, 24 C; B, 30 C; C, 36 C) for
(A) cryotolerant and (B) noncryotolerant strains. From Castellari, L.,
Magrini, A., Passarelli, P., Zambonelli, C., 1995. Effect of must fermentation
temperature on minor products formed by cryo- and non-cryotolerant
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. Ital. J. Food Sci. 7, 125e132, reproduced by permission.

chromosomes. Furthermore, its proteome (full set of
proteins) may be defined in the near future. In addition,
recent developments in DNA microarray technology
may make it easier to understand the intricacies and interconnections of its metabolic pathways (see Cavalieri
et al., 2000). These advances should permit a shift from
the traditional cross-and-select breeding to one based
on the selective elimination, modification, or introduction of specific genes.
Although S. cerevisiae is admirably suited to its role
as the predominant fermenter of grape must, and there
exists a wide diversity of strains possessing distinctive
and useful properties, improved expression or new
properties would be useful. Such modifications can
vary from subtle variations in aromatic synthesis
(Fig. 7.35) to the incorporation of properties such as
malolactic fermentation.

In contrast to industrial fermentations, winemaking
has made little use of genetic engineering (Cebollero
et al., 2007). This is partially explained by the complex
chemical origin of wine quality, which makes delineating specific improvements difficult. In addition, other
factors such as grape variety, fruit maturity, and fermentation temperature are generally, but not necessarily,
considered of greater importance. In addition, more is
known about the negative influences of certain yeast
properties than about the positive sensory attributes
they may donate. Finally, public suspicion of genetic engineering is regrettably, but undoubtedly, a prime reason
for its minimal use.
Features controlled by one or a few genes are the most
easily modified. For example, inactivating the gene that
encodes sulfite reductase limits the conversion of sulfite
to H2S. Improvement in other attributes, such as flocculation, has been more difficult. Flocculation is regulated
by several genes, epistatic (modifier) genes, and possibly
cytoplasmic genetic factors (Teunissen and Steensma,
1995). The major locus involved encodes cell-surface
proteins, notably lectins and lectin receptors. These are
not constitutively present on the cell surface, but appear
later in colony growth. This may result from the proteins
being selectively deposited where budding has
occurred, and at the tips of buds (Bony et al., 1998). In
addition, the flocculation mechanism employed by
different yeast strains can differ, as is the case with
top-versus bottom-fermenting brewing yeasts (Dengis
and Rouxhet, 1997).
In a similar manner, most important enologic properties appear to be under multigenic control (Marullo
et al., 2004). Alcohol tolerance, and the ability to ferment
steadily and cleanly at low temperatures, are undoubtedly multigenic; individual genes possessing slight or
synergistic effects. Genetic improvement is possible,
but probably will take considerable effort and time to
achieve. Chances of improvement are significantly
enhanced if the biochemical basis of such factors is understood. This knowledge can pinpoint the genes most
likely worth modifying.
Even more convoluted problems arise from our
inability to predict the consequences of changing the
direction of metabolic pathways (Prior et al., 2000).
Modifying the regulation of one pathway can have
important and unforeseen consequences on another
(Varela et al., 2012). Unanticipated metabolic disruptions are less likely when the compound concerned
is the end by-product of a metabolic pathway. Thus,
terpene synthesis has been incorporated into a wine
strain, by the transfer of farnesyl diphosphate synthetase from a laboratory strain, without apparent

514

7. Fermentation

Volatile compounds (μg/liter)

17 + 22

22

17
1000

1500

2000

800

1200

1600

600

900

1200

400

600

800

200

300

400

0

0
1

2

3
4
Variety

5

0
1

2

3
4
Variety

5

1

2

3
4
Variety

5

FIGURE 7.35 Concentration of the volatile components hexyl acetate (17), hexanol (22), and the sum (17 þ 22) in wines of five cultivars (1,
Chenin Blanc; 2, Sémillon; 3, Muscat of Alexandria; 4, Cape Riesling; 5, Colombar) with the yeast strains WE 14 (crosshatched bars) and WE 452
(filled bars). From Houtman, A.C., du Plessis, C.S., 1985. Influence du cépage et de la souche de levure. Bull. O.I.V. 58, 236e246, reproduced by
permission.

undesirable side-effects (Javelot et al., 1991). Use of
the modified yeast gives the wine a Muscat-like
attribute.
Many techniques are available to the researcher interested in improving wine yeasts. The most direct
approach involves simple selection and is often initially
effective. This method is much facilitated if a selective
culture medium can be devised to permit only cells containing the desired trait to multiply. Otherwise, cells
must be laboriously isolated and individually studied
for the presence of the desired trait.
Alternatively, adaptive evolution has had a long and
successful history in developing industrial microbes.
Although little used in wine-yeast breeding, its applicability has been illustrated by McBryde et al. (2006) and
Tilloy et al. (2014). It avoids problems associated with
the reticence of many winemakers and consumers to
accept wine produced using genetically engineered
strains. However, for certain changes, more direct means
are required to modify the genetic makeup. This can
involve procedures such as hybridization, backcrossing,
and mutagenesis or newer techniques such as somatic
fusion and genetic engineering.
Interspecific hybridization has occurred naturally in
the past within Saccharomyces sensu stricto species (de
Barros Lopes et al., 2002)). It has the potential to
augment (Steenseis et al., 2014) as well as introduce
novel flavor and aroma diversity (Bellon et al., 2011).
This may be facilitated by passage of the spores through
the gut of Drosophila, a known vector of S. cerevisiae (Reuter et al., 2007), and occurs in the guts of social wasps
(Stefanini et al., 2016). Nonetheless, wine yeast breeding
has proven difficult. One of the principal constraints results from the early self-fertilization (intraascus fusion of
spores of opposite mating-type) (Cubillos et al., 2009).

This results from the tendency of ascospores to switch
mating type shortly after germination, precluding
designed mating.
Crossing difficulties can occasionally be avoided by
tetrad analysisdthe early physical isolation and separation of ascospores. Positioning spores from desired
strains adjacent to one another can favor fusion and successful generic exchange. Selective mating can also be
facilitated if the strains are first made heterothallic
(Bakalinsky and Snow, 1990b). Most wine strains are homothallic (self-fertile), with haploid nuclei fusing within
the ascus or shortly thereafter, obviating the possibility
of desired crosses. Introduction of a recessive allele of
the HO gene prevents switching of the mating-type
gene, and correspondingly increases the probability of
successful breeding. An alternative technique has been
described by Ramı́rez et al. (1998). Regrettably, techniques that work successfully with well-characterized,
haploid, laboratory strains do not necessarily work
equivalently with industrial strains, such as wine
yeasts.
Breeding wine strains is also exacerbated by the low
frequency of sexual reproduction and spore germination (Bakalinsky and Snow, 1990a). Many strains undergo meiosis infrequently, a clear precondition for
sexual reproduction. Of the haploid spores produced,
infertility is frequent, probably due to the high incidence of aneuploidy (unequal numbers of similar
chromosomes) (Bakalinsky and Snow, 1990a). Wine
strains may also show chromosomal polymorphism,
associated with rearrangement. It has been suggested
that aneuploidy and other chromosomal abnormalities, due to their frequent occurrence, may possess
unsuspected selective value under winemaking
conditions.

Alcoholic fermentation

Even in successful matings, the typical diploid state
of wine yeasts can mask the presence of potentially
desirable recessive alleles. In haploid organisms, the
phenotype of recessive genes is expresseddthere being
no corresponding dominant (usually functional) allele.
Although a complication in crossing experiments,
diploidy permits “genome renewal” by allowing the selective elimination of growth-retarding alleles. These
slowly accumulate due to mutation (Ramı́rez et al.,
1999).
If only a single dominant genetic trait needs incorporating, backcross breeding can be effective. After incorporation of the desired trait, continued selection for
the train during repeated backcrossing with the desired
strain can rapidly eliminate undesired donor genes, unintentionally incorporated in the original cross.
Although knowing the genetic nature of a desired
trait is usually considered essential, breeding can occur
when it is unknown or under complex genetic control.
However, it requires crossing seemingly suitable
strains and growing out tens of thousands of progenies.
These must be individually assessed for their respective characteristics. Because this is so arduous, timeconsuming, and expensive, breeders may incorporate
selective techniques that permit only desirable progeny
to grow.
In situations where standard procedures are not
applicable (existing strains do not or are not known to
possess the desired trait), “unconventional” techniques
may be sought. For example, somatic fusion may permit
the incorporation of traits from yeast species with which
traditional mating is impossible. Somatic fusion requires
enzymatic, cell-wall dissolution, and subsequent mixing
of the protoplasts. This usually occurs in the presence of
polyethylene glycol or some other agent that facilitates
protoplast survival and fusion. Fusion permits the possibility of gene exchange by combining the genes of
both species in a single cytoplasm.
A serious limitation and disadvantage with somatic
fusion is the frequent instability of the association. Fused
cells often revert to one of the original species. The incorporation of foreign genes can also interfere with expression of existing traits.
Less disruptive is the incorporation of one or only a
few genes from a donor organism. The procedure is
called transformation or more popularly, genetic engineering. It has the advantage that the donor and recipient need not be closely related, as required for crossing
or somatic fusion. However, for it to be effective, its
true genetic basis must be known. This may be established with a test-cross (crossing strains with and
without the feature). Where the genes function in a
dominant/recessive manner, obtaining one of the standard generic ratios provides clear evidence. However,
where the alleles function in a codominant manner or

515

the phenotype is under multigenic control, a testcross is likely to prove inconclusive. In this situation,
mutant screening can be useful. Knowing this information is usually essential before attempting to locate the
gene(s) and detecting markers to assist in their isolation
for genetic procedures such as clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR),
TALEN, or ZFN.
In transformation, yeast protoplasts may be bathed in
a solution containing DNA from the donor organism.
These DNA segments also require appropriate initiator
and termination sequences for proper function when
incorporated. Upon uptake, the gene needs to be transported into the nucleus and inserted into a chromosome.
Without this, it is likely to be unstable and lost in subsequent generations. An alternative procedure uses short,
single-stranded oligonucleotides for allelic replacement
(DiCarlo et al., 2013).
Alternatively, the desired gene may be spliced into a
plasmid before uptake. Plasmids are circular, cytoplasmic DNA segments that partially control their own
replication. Thus, even without chromosomal insertion,
the gene may be replicated, along with the plasmid in
the cytoplasm. Although most eukaryotic cells do not
possess plasmids, wine yeasts frequently carry copies
of a 2-mm plasmid. Despite their presence, the plasmid
is nonessential to the host cell.
Using transformation, the malolactic gene from Lactococcus lactis has been transferred to S. cerevisiae, along
with the malate permease transport gene from
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Bony et al., 1997). The possession of several copies of the malolactic enzyme facilitates
the almost complete conversion of malic acid to lactic acid
within 4 days. Recently, a commercial strain (ML01) of
this type has been released, based on a construct of genes
from S. pombe and Oenococcus oeni (Husnik et al., 2007).
The strain conducts simultaneous alcoholic and malolactic fermentations. This permits rapid deacidification,
without the development of the buttery and other flavors
usually associated with bacterial malolactic fermentation.
Wine stabilization procedures can commence immediately after alcoholic fermentation, without waiting (sometimes for months) for bacterial malolactic fermentation to
come to completion.
Other genes of enologic interest that have been
incorporated are b-(1,4)-endoglucanase (to increase flavor by hydrolyzing glycosidically bound aromatics),
and alcohol acetyltransferase (to increase fruity flavors). Both features might benefit wines produced
from aromatically neutral varieties. Yeasts have also
been transformed with polysaccharide genes so that
they can degrade glucans and xylans (Louw et al.,
2006). They can increase the proportion of free-run
wine and enhance the color intensity and stability of
red wines.

516

7. Fermentation

Other examples involve combining the flocculation
gene (FLO1) with a late-fermentation, HSP promotor
(HSP30). Exposing the yeast to heat-shock can induce
flocculation “on demand.” In another case, a homozygous strain, recessive for one of the aldehyde dehydrogenase genes (ALD6), was transformed with a
high-copy 2-mm plasmid containing the glycerol 3phosphate dehydrogenase gene (GPD2). This diverted
more sugar to glycerol production, without an overproduction of acetic acid (Eglinton et al., 2002). This has the
potential benefits of reducing ethanol production (producing more balanced wines from fully mature grapes),
increasing the fermentation rate (by enhancing osmotolerance) (Remize et al., 1999) as well as enhancing the
wine’s smooth mouthfeel.
However, with characteristics based on many unlinked genes, it is a moot point whether genetic engineering has a selective advantage. In addition, genetic
engineering is still complex and expensive. Part of this
involves the long and complicated set of tests required
before getting approval from the US Food and Drug
Administration or equivalent regulatory agencies. There
is also considerable controversy about the safety of
releasing genetically modified organisms into the environment (Grossmann et al., 2011; Pérez-Torrado et al.,
2015) as well as reluctance by a segment of consumers
to consume products derived from genetically modified
organisms, be they plant or microbial. Although caution
is always prudent, imprudent caution impedes progress. When reflecting on the incredible modification
that has occurred historically during crop domestication
(Zohary and Hopf, 2000), notably with corn (Mangelsdorf, 1974), the modifications involved in genetic engineering seem almost inconsequential.
In contrast to the methods previously used in producing genetically modified organisms, CRISPR is far more
precise and less expensive (Stovicek et al., 2017; Raschmanová et al., 2018). It usually involves the silencing
or activation of individual genes, versus the insertion
of a gene from another organism. RNA segments are
used to locate the desired gene for modification
(Fig. 2.27). An associated DNA endonuclease produces
double-stranded breaks in the DNA segment recognized
by CRISPR. Subsequent repair may involve processes
such as nonhomologous knitting (end-joining) or homologous recombination. Such repair mechanisms (editing) may result in the excision of a gene segment
(eliminating or changing the gene’s function), facilitate
the insertion of a donor DNA segment (adding new
functionality), or upregulate (increase) the gene’s transcription rate.
A requirement for all useful strains, no matter how
they are derived, is genetic stability. Although a property of most traits, genetic stability is not a universal
characteristic (Ambrona et al., 2005). For instance,

flocculant strains often lose their ability to form large
clumps of cells, settling out as a powdery sediment. Genetic instability may arise due to aneuploidy, mutation,
or epigenetic modification. The latter is a previously unsuspected but major factor in gene regulation. Being
often influenced by environmental conditions or transposon movement, prediction seems impossible.
A final caveat relates to the difference between conditions in the laboratory, microvinification, and commercial production conditions. Not only do vinification
procedures vary from winery to winery, but the indigenous yeasts and bacterial flora of grapes can significantly influence the attributes expressed by an
inoculated strain. These differences frequently modulate
the characteristics of the added strain, to such a degree
that its intended effects may be largely negated or unpredictably qualified. Occasionally, indigenous yeasts
even displace inoculated strains. As always, experience
under actual winery conditions for several years is
essential to have relative confidence in the actual value
of “new and improved” strains.
Because of the oft mentioned reticence of consumers
(at least in some countries) to consume genetically modified crops, and the international trade of wine, many
wine producers prefer to avoid any association with
their techniques. Where deemed of value, they consider
it more judicious to use selective co-fermentation. It may
occasionally achieve some of the same goals derived by
genetic modification (see above, Spontaneous vs.
Induced Fermentation).

Environmental factors affecting fermentation
Carbon and energy sources
The major carbon and energy sources for fermentation are glucose and fructose. Other nutrients may be
used, but they are present either in small amounts
(amino acids), poorly incorporated into the cell (glycerol), or metabolized (respired) only in the presence of
oxygen (acetic acid and ethanol). Sucrose can be fermented, but it is seldom present in significant
amounts in grapes. It may be added, however, during
processes such as chaptalization and amelioration or
as a nutrient for the second fermentation in sparkling
wine production. For its metabolism, sucrose must be
enzymatically split into its components, glucose and
fructose. This occurs under the action of one of several
invertases. Hydrolysis usually occurs external to the
cell membrane by an invertase located between the
cell wall and plasma membrane (periplasm). Most
other
sugars
cannot
be
fermented
by
Saccharomyces cerevisiae due to the absence of the
requisite enzymes and/or transport proteins.

517

Alcoholic fermentation

Brewster et al., 1993). These responses to increased environmental osmolarity permit glycerol to equilibrate the
osmotic potential of the cytoplasm to that of the surrounding medium. The accumulation of trehalose may
also be involved.
Sugar content affects the synthesis of several important aromatic compounds. High sugar concentrations increase the production of acetic acid (Fig. 7.36 and its
esters. However, as indicated in Fig. 7.37, the effect of total soluble solids on esterification is not solely due to
sugar content. For example, the synthesis of isoamyl acetate and 2-phenethyl acetate during fermentation decreases with increasing maturity (associated with a
decreased synthesis of their corresponding fatty acids),
but increases in juice from immature grapes, augmented
with sugar to achieve the same  Brix. The importance of
precursors in the must have been directly confirmed by
Dennis et al. (2012). They found that the concentrations
of C6 alcohols and aldehydes directly influence the synthesis of acetates such as benzyl, hexyl, and octyl acetates during fermentation.
Over a wide range of sugar concentrations, ethanol
production is directly related to sugar content. However,
above 30%, ethanol production per gram sugar begins to
decline (Fig. 7.36).
Alcohols
All alcohols are toxic to varying degrees. Because
Saccharomyces cerevisiae shows considerable insensitivity to ethanol toxicity, much effort has been spent
attempting to understand the nature of this tolerance,
and why it breaks down at high concentrations. Several
factors appear to be associated with ethanol tolerance.
These include activation of glycerol and trehalose synthesis (Hallsworth, 1998; Lucero et al., 2000); accumulation of HSPs (e.g., HSP104 and HSP12) (Sales et al.,
2000); and modification of the plasma membrane (e.g.,
activating membrane ATPase, substitution of ergosterol
140
Alcohol

6

100

5

80

4
3

60
40

Acetic acid

20
0
110 157 205 262 299 346 393 440 488 535 582
Original sugar, g/liter

FIGURE 7.36

2
1

Acetic acid, g/liter

120
Alcohol, g/liter

Significantly, though, other grape sugars can be utilized as an energy source by several spoilage
microorganisms.
Glucose is transported across the plasma membrane
using several mechanisms (Kruckeberg, 1996).
Saccharomyces cerevisiae shows an extraordinary duplication and diversification of its HXT (hexose transport)
gene family. Each of the approximately 18 variants possesses distinct regulatory and transport-kinetic properties. Some are low-affinity systems, typically working
at high substrate concentrations. Low-affinity systems
appear to function by facilitated diffusion (without
direct expenditure of metabolic energy) and most effective at high sugar concentrations. For example, the
HXT1 carrier is expressed only at the beginning of
fermentation (Perez et al., 2005), HXT2 (an intermediate
carrier) is active during the lag phase, whereas HXT3 is
functional throughout fermentation (but maximally at
the onset of the stationary phase). In contrast, highaffinity systems require metabolic energy for transport
to occur but are particularly valuable at low glucose
concentrations. They tend to be activated by a membrane protein, Snf3p, when sugar levels decline.
Despite this, the major high-affinity systems of wine
yeasts (HXT6 and HXT7) become active when the yeast
colony enters the stationary phase (when about half the
sugar still remains in the must). Although these transport proteins are named because of their transport capabilities, deletion mutants suggest that they have
additional, regulatory roles that are not fully
understood.
Glucose concentration not only differentially affects
the activation of sugar transport mechanisms, but also
regulates expression of enzymes in the TCA and glyoxylate pathways. Nevertheless, continued expression of
selected chromosomal (vs. mitochondrial) genes results
in some TCA enzymes being found at higher sugar concentrations in the cytoplasm. They catalyze biosynthetic
reactions essential for growth.
At maturity, the sugar concentration of most wine
grapes ranges between 20% and 25%. At this concentration, the osmotic influence of sugar can delay the onset
of fermentation. The resulting partial plasmolysis of
yeast cells may be one of the causes of a lag period before
active fermentation commences (Nishino et al., 1985). In
addition, cell viability may be reduced; cell division
retarded; and sensitivity to alcohol toxicity enhanced.
At sugar concentrations above 25%e30%, the likelihood
of fermentation terminating prematurely increases
markedly. Strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae differ
greatly in their sensitivity to sugar concentration.
The nature of the remarkable tolerance of wine yeasts
to the plasmolytic action of sugar is unclear, but appears
to be related to increased synthesis of glycerol and its
reduced permeability through the cell membrane (see

0
676

Effect of sugar concentration on alcohol and volatile
acid production. After unpublished data of C. von der Heide, from
Schanderl, H., 1959. Die Mikrobiologie des Mostes und Weines, second ed.
Ulmer, Stuttgart, Germany, reproduced by permission.

518

7. Fermentation

Concentration in wine (mg/l)

Iso-amyl acetate

2-Phenethyl acetate

6

0.6

5

0.5

4

0.4

3

0.3

2

0.2

1

0.1

0
18

20
22
°B of juice

24

0
18

Concentration in wine (mg/l)

24

Ethyl decanoate

Ethyl octanoate
1.2

0.6

1.0

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

0
18

20
22
°B of juice

0
20
22
°B of juice

24

18

20
22
°B of juice

24

FIGURE 7.37 Ester concentration of wines made from grapes of varying maturity and with chaptalized must. Wines for musts of 4 of
maturity (————); average slope from wines produced from chaptalized must (d d d d). From Houtman, A.C., Marais, J., du Plessis, C.S., 1980.
Factors affecting the reproducibility of fermentation of grape juice and of the aroma composition of wines, I. Grape maturity, sugar, inoculum concentration,
aeration, juice turbidity and ergosterol. Vitis 19, 37e84, reproduced by permission.

for lanosterol, increasing the portion of phosphatidyl
inositol vs. phosphatidyl choline, and augmenting the
incorporation of palmitic acid) (Aguilera et al., 2006).
These membrane changes decrease permeability (Mizoguchi and Hara, 1998), minimizing the loss of nutrients
and cofactors from the cell, notably magnesium and
calcium. That these factors may disrupt cellular redox
potential is suggested by the growth stimulation provided by acetaldehyde (increasing the availability of
NADþ) (Vriesekoop et al., 2007). Vacuolar membrane
function is also crucial for the retention of toxic substances stored in vacuoles (Kitamoto, 1989). In addition
to disrupting membrane function, ethanol can inactivate some enzymes by inducing structural
modifications.
Although alcohol buildup eventually inhibits fermentation, it begins disrupting yeast metabolism at much
lower concentrations. For example, suppression of sugar
uptake can begin at 2% ethanol (Dittrich, 1977). This

property is partially dependent on the fermentation
temperature, and is reflected in yeast growth potential
(Casey and Ingledew, 1986), possibly through it effect
on membrane fluidity. Disruption of ammonium transport and inhibition of general amino acid permeases
also occurs as alcohol content increases. These influences can be partially offset by enrichment with unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., adding yeast hulls). Although
higher (fusel) alcohols are more inhibitory than ethanol,
their much lower concentration substantially limits their
toxic influence.
Although most strains of S. cerevisiae can ferment up
to 13%e15% ethanol, there is wide variation in this ability. Cessation of growth routinely occurs at concentrations below those that inhibit fermentation. It is
generally believed that this results from disruption of
the semifluid nature of the cell membrane, thus lowering
water activity (Hallsworth, 1998). This destroys the ability of the cell to control cytoplasmic function, leading to

519

Alcoholic fermentation

nutrient loss and disruption of the electrochemical
gradient across the membrane. The latter is vital for
nutrient transport (see Cartwright et al., 1989). Lowered
water activity also disrupts hydrogen bonding, essential
to enzyme function. High sugar contents enhance
ethanol toxicity.
Ethanol is occasionally added to fermenting must or
wine, usually in the form of distilled wine spirits (unmatured brandy), to arrest or prevent yeast and other microbial activity. This property is used selectively in
sherry, port, and madeira production. In port, the
brandy is added early during fermentation to retain
about half the must’s sugar content. This leaves the
wine with the aromatic attributes typical of early
fermentation. For example, young port is likely to be
higher in acetic acid, acetaldehyde, and acetoin content,
but lower in glycerol, fixed acids, and higher alcohols
than had it fermented to dryness (see Figs. 7.21 and
7.22). In sherry production, wine spirits are added at
the end of fermentation to inhibit the growth of acetic
acid bacteria (>15% ethanol), or flor yeasts (>18%
ethanol), during solera aging.
The accumulation of alcohol during fermentation has
an important dissolving action on phenolic compounds.
This effect is most pronounced at the beginning of
fermentation. Given sufficient maceration time, though,
phenolic compounds dissolve in water (HernándezJiménez et al., 2012). Most of the distinctive taste of
red wines depends on the facilitated extraction of flavanols by ethanol during fermentation. Ethanol aids but is
less critical to the extraction of anthocyanins. Phenolic
extraction can be further enhanced in the presence of
sulfur dioxide (Oszmianski et al., 1988).
Nitrogenous compounds
Next to sugars, nitrogenous compounds are quantitatively the most important yeast nutrients. Under most
circumstances, juice and must contain sufficient nitrogen for fermentation. Nitrogen contents can, however,
vary considerablydvalues reported for juice in California can range from 60 to 2400 mg/L. In addition, some
cultivars have a tendency to experience nitrogen deficiency more frequently than others (e.g., Chardonnay
and Colombard). The situation can be exacerbated if
the juice has been given a prefermentation centrifugation or filtration.
Nitrogen is required not only for the synthesis of
structural, transport, and enzymatic proteins (essential
for growth and metabolism) but is also an essential
element in information molecules (nucleic acids) and
electron transport compounds. The importance of a
ready availability of nitrogen for synthesis is illustrated
by the rapid turnover in sugar transport proteins. These
essential molecules have a half-life of about 6 h.

Production of reduced sulfur odors can also commence
within 30 min of the onset of nitrogen starvation.
Most nitrogen in grape must is in the form of free
amino acids, notably proline and arginine. The proline
content can be disregarded as it is poorly incorporated
under anaerobic conditions. Thus, most of the assimilable nitrogen available to yeasts consists of arginine,
in addition to any ammonium ions present. Because
arginine is largely localized in the skins, the duration
of maceration and the method of pressing (with or
without prior crushing) can significantly influence its
liberation. With vineyard fertilization, the content of
other available amino acids, notably glutamine, is
increased.
Uptake is highly correlated with the dynamics of
yeast growth (Fig. 7.38), being initially stored before
use. Optimum levels suggested by Henschke and Jiranek (1993) are in the range of 400e500 mg/L, specific
values depending on the demands of the yeast species
and strain as well as fermentation conditions (e.g., temperature and must sugar content). Significantly higher

250

mg l–1

cells ml–1 x 106

250

Viable Yeasts
Assimilable Nitrogen

24°C
200

200

V
i
a
b
l
e
y
e
a
s
t
s

18°C

150

150

A
s
s
i
m
i
l
a
b
l
e

14°C
100

100

50

50

N
i
t
r
o
g
e
n

14°C
18°C
24°C

0
0

0
5

10

15

20

Time (d)

FIGURE 7.38 Evolution of viable yeast cells (106 CFU/mL) and
assimilable nitrogen (mg/L): amino acids, apart from proline, plus
ammonia during fermentation at 14 C, 18 C, and 24 C. From Lopez, R.,
Santamaria, P., Gutierrez, A.R., Iñiguez, M., 1996. Changes in amino acids
during the alcoholic fermentation of grape juice at different temperatures. Sci.
Aliments 16, 529e535, reproduced by permission.

520

7. Fermentation

nitrogen concentrations can be a disadvantage. They
promote unnecessary cell multiplication and correspondingly reduce the conversion of sugar to alcohol.
In contrast, low values or amino acid imbalance can
enhance the release of higher alcohols; the accumulation
of reduced sulfur off-odors; and an increased likelihood
of sluggish or stuck fermentation.
When nitrogen is required, it is usually supplied as
DAP, although glutamine appears to be an effective
alternative (Sturgeon et al., 2013). Ammonia is the least
energy-demanding form of nitrogen available to yeasts.
Amino acid uptake is associated with simultaneous
hydrogen uptake. This eventually requires the expenditure of ATP for the expulsion of Hþ, to avoid lowering
the pH of the cytoplasm. As ethanol content rises, its
disruption of the cell membrane results in the spontaneous diffusion of Hþ into the cytoplasm, and uptake
of amino acids declines or ceases.
If added, DAP is usually supplied halfway through
fermentation, near the onset of the stationary phase
(Bely et al., 1990). As such, it does not interfere with the
early synthesis of sugar transport proteins (Bely et al.,
1994). Earlier addition reduces yeast uptake of amino
acids early during fermentation, when alcohol accumulation is still low. This has the potential to influence flavor
development, due to the involvement of amino acids in
higher alcohol and thereby ester formation and other sensory attributes (Fig. 7.39). Late addition is ill-advised as
residual amounts can favor microbial spoilage.
In situations where nitrogen deficiency is severe, significant amounts of hydrogen sulfide are likely to be
released as a consequence of restricted amino acid synthesis and degradation. This is most marked if nitrogen
becomes limiting during the exponential phase. It is
countered by the availability of ammonia (or most
amino acids, with the notable exception of cysteine
and proline). The breakdown of cysteine has the potential to increase the release of H2S and mercaptans. Under
such conditions, earlier addition of DAP is advisable
(Jiranek et al., 1995). Avoiding nitrogen deficiency also
minimizes arginine degradation, and the subsequent
release of urea. This in turn reduces the likelihood of
ethyl carbamate generation, especially in wine exposed
to heating. Ethyl carbamate is a suspected carcinogen.
Although a valuable fermentation aid, DAP addition
is best minimized or avoided where possible. Excessive
nitrogen can predispose some strains to high hydrogen
sulfide production, as much as low nitrogen availability.
Rapid methods of estimating assimilable nitrogen
(Dukes and Butzke, 1998) permit wineries to better
assess actual need (Gardner et al., 2002). Fermentation
temperature, sugar content, yeast strain (Brice et al.,
2014), and flavor preferences need to be considered
when estimating the “ideal” nitrogen supply (O’Kennedy and Reid, 2008). Because of the multiplicity of

D254
LSD = 0.47
Reduced
4
Floral
LSD = 0.31

Bruised apples
LSD = 0.45

3
2

Earth/Dirty
LSD = 0.31

Dark fruit
LSD = 0.37

1
0

Cheese/Sweat
LSD = 0.45

Red fruit
LSD = 0.35

Yeast
LSD = 0.31

Confectionary
LSD = 0.35

Savoury
LSD = 0.38

Vegetal
LSD = 0.28
YAN 100
YAN 250

1176

YAN 400

LSD = 0.47
Reduced
4
Floral
LSD = 0.31

3

Bruised apples
LSD = 0.45

2

Earth/Dirty
LSD = 0.31

Dark fruit
LSD = 0.37

1
0

Cheese/Sweat
LSD = 0.45

Red fruit
LSD = 0.35

Yeast
LSD = 0.31

Confectionary
LSD = 0.35
Savoury
LSD = 0.38

Vegetal
LSD = 0.28

FIGURE 7.39 Sensory profiles of experimental Shiraz wines fermented with Saccharomyces cerevisiae (D254) or S. bayanus (AWRI
1176)d100 mg/L yeast assimilable nitrogen (YAN) has no nitrogen
addition; 250 mg/L, same must as 100 mg/L but initial YAN increased
until 250 mg/L by means of DAP addition; 400 mg/L, same must as
100 mg/L but initial YAN increased until 400 mg/L by means of DAP
addition. From Ugliano, M., Travis, B., Francis, I.L., Henschke, P.A., 2010.
Volatile composition and sensory properties of Shiraz wines as affected by
nitrogen supplementation and yeast species: rationalizing nitrogen modulation of wine aroma. J. Agric. Food Chem. 58, 12417e12425. Copyright 2010,
American Chemical Society, reproduced by permission.

factors affecting the beneficial/detrimental aspects of nitrogen supplementation, it is often recommended that
when conditions change (such as yeast strain or other
viniviticultural practices), microvinification should be
conducted prior to full-scale fermentation. It is possible
to detect nitrogen deficiency during fermentation by the
high expression of several genes in yeast cells (MendesFerreira et al., 2007). Regrettably, this is not practical
method for the vast majority of wineries.
Several conditions can reduce must nitrogen content.
Nitrogen deficiency in the vineyard and must clarification can limit or diminish the assimilable nitrogen content. If sufficiently marked, inadequate nitrogen levels
slow fermentation and are one potential cause of “stuck”
fermentations. This may result from the partially irreversible inactivation of sugar transport by ammonia

521

Alcoholic fermentation

500

400

Total nitrogen per liter

starvation (Lagunas, 1986). The half-life of the main
glucose transport system is short, with complete inactivation occurring within about 50 h (Schulze et al.,
1996). This results from both the cessation of protein
synthesis and enzyme degradation. The lack of
ammonia can also negate the activation of crucial glycolytic enzymes, such as phosphofructokinase and pyruvic kinase. This in turn further inhibits glucose uptake
(Bely et al., 1994).
Juice nitrogen content may be markedly decreased as
a consequence of Botrytis cinerea infection (Rapp and
Reuther, 1971). Nitrogen deficiency is also a frequent
problem in the second fermentation of sparkling wines,
resulting both from consumption during the initial
fermentation and clarification of the assemblage. It is
avoided by the addition of ammonium salts, notably
DAP.
Nitrogen demand and yeast incorporation occurs
most rapidly during fermentation’s exponential phase.
This correlates with the period when cell growth and
division are most active. Subsequently, there is a
slow release of nitrogen-containing compounds back
into the fermenting juice/must (Fig. 7.40).
Of inorganic nitrogen sources, ammonia is incorporated preferentially. Wine yeasts tend to overexpress
ammonia transport genes (MEP2) (Cavalieri et al.,
2000). The oxidized state of ammonia permits
its direct incorporation into organic compounds.
Although ammonia is potentially capable of repressing the uptake of amino acids, its concentration in
grape juice is usually insufficient to exert this
influence.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae has several amino acid transport systems (Cartwright et al., 1989). One is nonspecific and directs the uptake of all amino acids, with
the exception of proline. The other systems are more selective, transporting only particular amino acids. These
properties probably explain why certain amino acids
are preferentially incorporated. Their selective uptake
seems to be consistent between strains, some being
rapidly absorbed (lysine), followed asparagine,
glycine, leucine, leucine, isoleucine, while alanine,
arginine, valine, and tryptophan tend to be the last utilized (Crépin et al., 2012).
The principal amino acids available in grape must are
proline and arginine. Because proline metabolism requires molecular oxygen for its metabolism (Tomenchok
and Brandriss, 1987), arginine is the primary amino acid
nitrogen source. Unfortunately, arginine may be
degraded to ornithine and urea. If the ammonia derived
from the breakdown of urea is not incorporated by cell
metabolism, urea may accumulate and be secreted

300

In must and wine
200
10°
15°
25°
In yeast

100

10°
15°
25°
0
0

20

40

60

Sugar fermented
percent

80

100 10

20

30

40

Days after end
of fermentation

FIGURE 7.40 Changes in total nitrogen during and after fermentation in musts and in yeasts fermenting them. After Nilov, V.I., Valuiko,
G.G., 1958. Changes in nitrogen during fermentation (in Russian). Vinodel.
Vinograd. S.S.S.R. 18, 4e7, in Amerine, M.A., Berg, H.W., Kunkee, R.E.,
Ough, C.S., Singleton, V.L., Webb, A.D., 1980. The Technology of Wine
Making. Avi, Westport, CT, reproduced by permission.

from the cell. This, as noted, could participate in the generation of ethyl carbamate (Ough et al., 1990). Although
proline is not metabolized under fermentative conditions, its presence may be important in stabilizing the
yeast-cell membrane.
Amines and peptides may also be incorporated as nitrogen sources, but not protein nitrogen. Wine yeasts are
incapable of either transporting proteins into the cell or
enzymatically degrading them to amino acids outside
the plasma membrane.
Yeast cells generally synthesize their own amino acid
and nucleotide requirements from inorganic nitrogen
and sugar. Consequently, most yeast strains do not
need these metabolites in the medium. Nevertheless,
several can and are assimilated from the medium when

522

7. Fermentation

available. Assimilation avoids the diversion of metabolic
intermediates and energy to their biosynthesis.
Nitrogen content can influence the synthesis and
release of aromatic compounds during fermentation.
Noticeable in this regard is the reduction in fusel alcohol
content in the presence of ammonia or urea. The effect
can be reversed by the presence and assimilation of
certain amino acids. These opposing effects are due to
fusel alcohol use in amino acid biosynthesis, and their
release during amino acid deamination, respectively. Under nitrogen starvation, there is a dramatic increase in the
production of glycerol and trehalose (Schulze et al., 1996).
During, and especially after fermentation, cellular
constituents are slowly released into the wine. This is
associated with the autolysis of dead and dying yeast
cells (see Fig. 7.42). Because this may activate undesirable microbial activity, the first racking typically occurs
shortly after fermentation. When malolactic fermentation is desired, however, racking is delayed until the bacterial conversion of malic to lactic acid is complete.
Racking is also delayed if sur lies contact is desired.
When the liberation of assimilable nitrogen into the
wine is desired, small cooperage is preferred as it provides better contact between the wine and the lees
(larger surface area/volume ratio).
Large-molecular-weight nitrogen-containing compounds are also released during yeast autolysis at the
end of fermentation. This is particularly notable in relation to mannoproteins during sur lies maturation. The
amount released often reaches 150e200 mg/L, but
actual amounts depend on the yeast strain, agitation,
duration of contact, and the ambient temperature.
Lipids
Lipids are the basic constituents of cell membranes
(phospholipids and sterols), function in energy storage
(oils), act as pigments (carotenoids), and are components
in proteins (lipoproteins) and carbohydrates (glycolipids).
Yeasts synthesize their own lipid requirements when
grown aerobically, but are unable to produce long-chain,
unsaturated fatty acids and sterols under anaerobic conditions. This is less significant in red wine production,
where limited supplies of precursors are derived from
the pomace during fermentation. The anaerobic limitation of lipid synthesis can, however, cause sluggish
fermentation in highly clarified white juice. Clarification
can remove more than 90% of the fatty acid content. This
is particularly marked with unsaturated fatty acids,
notably oleic, linoleic, and linolenic acids (Bertrand
and Miele, 1984). Sterols are probably removed as well.
Nevertheless, yeasts may possess sufficient reserves of
these vital nutrients to initiate fermentation and complete several cell divisions (typically four to five when

a yeast inoculum is used). However, in spontaneous
fermentation, up to 16 or more cell divisions may be
involved in reaching the typical stationary population.
Thus, a deficit in sterol and unsaturated fatty acid content can aggravate ethanol-induced reduction in glucose
uptake, resulting in stuck fermentation.
Wine yeasts are sensitive to mid-chain (C8 and C10)
saturated fatty acids, such as octanoic and decanoic
acid. As by-products of yeast metabolism, they accumulate during fermentation. Because they increase membrane fluidity, proton influx increases, acidifying the
cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic acidification favors the ethanolinduced leakage of nutrients, such as amino acids (Sá
Correia et al., 1989), and can inhibit both high- and lowaffinity sugar-transport systems (Zamora et al., 1996).
Because toxicity increases with a decrease in pH, injury
is likely associated with the undissociated form of these
fatty acids. Toxic effects are limited or reversed by the
addition of ergosterol and long-chain unsaturated fatty
acids (Fig. 7.41) or the addition of various absorptive substances, such as activated charcoal, bentonite, silica gel, or
yeast hulls (consisting primarily of cell-wall remnants
following controlled autolysis). By removing octanoic
and decanoic acids (via absorption), their potential for
membrane disruption is reduced. In addition, yeast hulls
may act as a source of required sterols and unsaturated
fatty acids (see Munoz and Ingledew, 1990).
Another possible solution to problems associated
with low sterol and unsaturated fatty acid content is
the use of yeasts with high sterol contents. Sterol synthesis is commonly suppressed in the presence of glucose,
but some strains do not show this effect. Growing yeast
under highly aerobic conditions, as in active dry yeast
production, also generates cells elevated in unsaturated
fatty acids. They may contain up to three times the sterol
content of cells grown semiaerobically (Tyagi, 1984).
Musts inoculated with strains possessing enhanced sterol contents frequently ferment more sugar than strains
possessing low sterol contents.
Phenols
The phenolic content of must can have various effects
on the course of fermentation. In red grapes, anthocyanins stimulate fermentation, whereas proanthocyanidins in white grapes can be slightly inhibitory
(Cantarelli, 1989). Nonetheless, they appear to favor
fermentation after an initial inhibitory period (Li et al.,
2014). By contrast, phenolic aldehydes may be inhibitory
or influence the direction of yeast metabolism (Cao et al.,
2014). Phenolic compounds are also a determining factor
in the activation of film formation, important in fino
sherry production (Cantarelli, 1989). Certain phenolics,
notably the esters of gallic acid, are toxic, whereas

523

Alcoholic fermentation

100
90
80

Sugar used (%)

70
60
50
40

Juice filtrate
Juice filtrate + fatty acids + ergosterol (5th day)
Juice filtrate + fatty acids + ergosterol (1st day)
Juice filtrate + fatty acids + ergosterol + yeast extract

30
20
10
0

0

5

10

15
20
Fermentation time (days)

25

30

35

FIGURE 7.41 Fermentation curves of juice filtrates with the addition of yeast extract, unsaturated fatty acids, and ergosterol at inoculation and
on the fifth day thereafter. From Houtman, A.C., du Plessis, C.S., 1986. Nutritional deficiencies of clarified white grape juices and their correction in relation
to fermentation. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 7, 39e46, reproduced by permission.

others, such as chlorogenic and isochlorogenic acids,
stimulate fermentation. The principal situation in which
phenols suppress yeast metabolism is during the second
fermentation of sparkling wine production. This is one
of the primary reasons why few red sparkling wines
are produced using standard procedures.
In addition to affecting fermentation, phenols may
also be modified by yeast actiondthe most sensory significant example being the decarboxylation of ferulic
and p-coumaric acids to aromatic vinylphenols (4-vinyl
guaiacol and 4-vinylphenol, respectively) (Chatonnet
et al., 1989). Other phenolic constituents in the must
may influence this conversion.
Sulfur dioxide
Sulfur dioxide is one of the most common wine additives. However, sulfur dioxide is also a by-product
of amino acid metabolism. In most instances, yeastderived sulfur dioxide is rapidly bound to organic
compounds in yeast cells or the fermenting must.
Thus, its antimicrobial potential is unlikely to play a
significant role in the success in S. cerevisiae in outcompeting other microbes during fermentation. Interestingly, sulfur dioxide addition favors not only the
growth of strains resistant to sulfur dioxide, but also
appears to select strains that produce greater amounts
of sulfur dioxide.
The differential action of sulfur dioxide against the
grape epiphytic flora can be used to selectively control
the action of indigenous yeasts and bacteria (Bokulich
et al., 2015). As our understanding of their role increases
in wine fragrance development, their modulation versus

inhibition is being viewed as an important tool in adjusting wine character.
At the concentrations typically used (less than
50 ppm total with healthy grapes), sulfur dioxide is
not known to affect the fermentation rate. However, it
can slow the onset of fermentation. The presence of
15e20 ppm can reduce the viability of a yeast inoculum
from 106 to 104 cells/mL or less (Lehmann, 1987).
Although sulfur dioxide limits the growth of indigenous
yeasts and bacteria, this may be unnecessary as inoculated yeasts tend to rapidly come to dominate fermentation, even in the absence of sulfur dioxide (Petering
et al., 1993; Henick-Kling et al., 1998).
Yeast resistance to sulfur dioxide is correlated with
several factors. For example, the SSU1-R gene that controls sulfite efflux is overexpressed in wine yeasts (Hauser
et al., 2001). This apparently results from its translocation
to a position where it is under the control of the ECM34
promotor (Pérez-Ortı́n et al., 2002). In addition, resistance
appears to be influenced by the presence of various nutrients, for example adenine increases tolerance, whereas
methionine decreases it (Aranda et al., 2006).
In addition to its antimicrobial activities, sulfur dioxide can significantly influence yeast metabolism. Sulfur
dioxide readily binds with several carbonyl compounds,
notably acetaldehyde, pyruvic acid, and a-ketoglutaric
acid. Binding increases their biosynthesis and potential
release into the fermenting must. Thus, their concentration in finished wine often correlates with the concentration of added sulfur dioxide. Sulfur dioxide also favors
glycerol synthesis, whereas it tends to limit acetic acid
production. Fixed acidity generally does not change,

524

7. Fermentation

partially because sulfur dioxide suppresses the metabolism of both lactic and acetic acid bacteria.
As sulfur dioxide binds to carbonyl compounds, it
inadvertently increases the amount needed to suppress
the action of spoilage microbes. Although molecular
SO2 is the most antimicrobial state of sulfur in wine,
bound forms can be more significant because of their
higher concentration (Wells and Osborne, 2011). This
may involve uptake of bound form and the subsequent
release of SO2 inside the cell.
Sulfur dioxide favors the extraction of phenolic compounds including anthocyanins. However, it can also
reversibly decolorize anthocyanins. In addition, anthocyanins bound to sulfur dioxide are unable to polymerize with proanthocyanidins. This can adversely
reduce long-term color stability.
Although one of the most effective antimicrobial
agents, many strains of Saccharomycodes ludwigii, Zygosaccharomyces bailii, and Brettanomyces spp. are comparatively tolerant to sulfur dioxide (Hammond and Carr,
1976, see Fig. 8.11). Thus, other measures are required
for their control.
Elemental sulfur, potentially present as a residue
from its use as a fungicide, can be assimilated and
used in the synthesis of sulfur-containing amino acids
and coenzymes. It may also be oxidized to sulfate and
sulfur dioxide or reduced to hydrogen sulfide. The
reduction of sulfur to hydrogen sulfide may be a means,
albeit aromatically unpleasant, of maintaining a favorable redox balance in yeast cells under anaerobic
conditions.
Oxygen and aeration
The process of fermentation itself requires no oxygen. Even in the presence of oxygen, S. cerevisiae preferentially ferments. Nevertheless, trace amounts of
oxygen can indirectly favor fermentation by permitting the biosynthesis of sterols and long-chain unsaturated fatty acids. The production and proper
functioning of the yeast cell membrane require sterols
(primarily ergosterol) as well as C16 and C18 fatty
acids. Alternatively, essential sterols can be extracted
from crushed grapes during maceration. Molecular
oxygen is also required for the synthesis of the vitamin
nicotinic acid. Anaerobic conditions favor the accumulation of toxic (C8 and C10) fatty carboxylic acids
(Alexandre and Charpentier, 1995) because they are
not acylated in the synthesis of required long-chain
fatty acids.
Juice oxidation during stemming and crushing is usually sufficient to permit adequate yeast growth during
vinification. The amount of oxygen absorbed depends

on the duration of skin contact. Because phenolic extraction increases with extended skin contact, the capacity of
the juice to consume oxygen rises correspondingly. In
removing free oxygen, conditions shift from oxidative
to reductive. Aeration beyond that which occurs coincidentally during stemming and crushing (e.g., hyperoxygenation) is variously viewed as being beneficial
(Cheynier et al., 1991) or detrimental (Dubourdieu and
Lavigne, 1990). These different views may result from
strain response to oxygen; the degree and timing of oxygen uptake; and increased synthesis of higher alcohols
and esters (Valero et al., 2002). Nevertheless, hyperoxygenation does favor cell growth and promotes
fermentation.
The initial browning associated with crushing is
acceptable because the colored compounds that form
are primarily lost during fermentation (attachment to
and precipitation with yeast cells) or removed during
subsequent clarification. It results in providing white
wines a degree of resistance to oxidative browning (by
eliminating readily oxidizable phenols early during
vinification).
During red wine fermentation, oxygen may be
absorbed during pumping over. The resulting incorporation of about 10 mg O2/liter often speeds the process
of fermentation. This is more marked when aeration occurs at the end of the exponential phase (Sablayrolles
and Barre, 1986). The yeast population increases, and
average cell viability is enhanced. Aeration also increases the production of acetaldehyde, thus favoring
color stability by assisting the early formation of
anthocyaninetannin copolymers.
During the fermentation of white wines, winemakers
tend to assiduously avoid oxygen exposure. It increases
a tendency to synthesize fusel alcohols and acetaldehyde. Increased levels of volatile acidity (acetic acid)
may also result from the activation of acetic acid bacteria. In addition, semiaerobic conditions can depress the
synthesis of esters (Nykänen, 1986). However, the
absence of oxygen can enhance the likelihood of
hydrogen sulfide accumulation. Depending on the
timing of aeration, oxygen uptake may either oxidize
H2S or enhance its synthesis (Houtman and du Plessis,
1981). To offset H2S accumulation, short aeration at the
beginning. or a few days after the commencement of
fermentation (Bertrand and Torres-Alegre, 1984), has
been recommended. The timing and extent of aeration
can also influence urea accumulation and therefore the
potential for ethyl carbamate production (Henschke
and Ough, 1991). In situations where stuck fermentation
has been a problem, the addition of nitrogen (as DAP)
and slight aeration (1 mg/L) at the onset of the

525

Alcoholic fermentation

Carbon dioxide and pressure
During fermentation, large volumes of carbon dioxide are generatedeabout 260 mL/g glucose. This equates to over 50 times the volume of the juice fermented.
The escape of carbon dioxide can remove about 20% of
the heat generated during fermentation (the rest largely
associated with water evaporation or radiated to the
environment).
Various other volatile compounds are also carried off
with the carbon dioxide. Ethanol loss is estimated to be
about 1%e1.5% of that produced (Williams and Boulton,
1983), but varies with sugar use and temperature.
Higher alcohols and monoterpenes are lost to about
the same degree (w1%). In contrast, significant dissipation of both ethyl and acetate esters can occur (Fig. 7.42).
Depending on the variety, and especially the fermentation temperature, up to 25% of these aromatically important compounds may be lost (Miller et al., 1987). On
average, more acetate esters may volatilize than ethyl esters, but not consistently (Morakul et al., 2013). This degree of escape could noticeably reduce the fruity
character of a wine. Trapping these compounds for readdition to the wine is an interesting concept (Guerrini
et al., 2016; Lezaeta et al., 2018). The idea is not new,
though, having been advocated almost two centuries
ago (Gervais, 1820).
Volatilization from fermenting juice is a function of
concentration; the rates of synthesis and degradation;

(A)
800

400

0
Quantity of compound in effluent CO2(mg)

stationary phase has been suggested (Julien et al., 2000).
In the production of sparkling wine, aeration of the
assemblage prior to the second fermentation is beneficial.
Because the relative benefits of oxygen uptake vary with
the yeast strain and cultivar, tests of its value need onsite verification.
Following fermentation, limited slow oxygen uptake
(w40 mg O2/liter) is considered to benefit red wine
maturation. It favors color stability and reduces the
typical reduction in color associated with malolactic
fermentation (Pérez-Magariño et al., 2007). In contrast,
most white wines are painstakingly protected from air
exposure following fermentation. The exception to this
practice occurs when wines are given extended contact
with the lees (sur lies maturation). In this situation,
limited oxygen uptake is desired and achieved by periodically stirring the lees (bâttonage). This limits the accumulation of an excessively reduced environment in the
lees (and the associated development of reducedsulfur off-odors) (Fornairon-Bonnefond et al., 2003).
Oxygen absorption is influenced by many factors
including clarification, skin contact, phenol concentration, sulfur dioxide content, the presence of polyphenol
oxidases, sugar concentration, temperature, pumping
over, rate of fermentation, and of course protection
from air before, during, and after fermentation.

(B)
50

25

0

(C)
12

6

0
0

8
Fermentation time (days)

16

FIGURE 7.42 Yeast aromatics released with CO2 during fermentation
at 15 C. (A) :, Isoamyl acetate; B, ethyl n-hexanoate; ,, ethyl n-octanoate; Cisoamyl alcohol; (B) ,, Isobutyl acetate; B, hexyl acetate; C,
ethyl n-butanoate; :, isobutanol; (C) B, Ethyl n-decanoate; ,, 1-hexanol;
:, 2-phenylethanol. From Miller, G.C., Amon, J.M., Simpson, R.F., 1987.
Loss of aroma compounds in carbon dioxide effluent during white wine
fermentation. Food Technol. Aust. 39, 246e253, reproduced by permission.

weak associations with matrix constituents and their
comparative solubilities in carbon dioxide and the
increasingly alcoholic juice. Dissipation is further
affected by fermentor size and shape. For example, small
fermentors possess higher surface area/volume ratios
and lower liquid pressures than larger fermentors, favoring volatility. In addition, although the reduction of
vapor pressure at low temperatures tends to limit volatilization, the slower release of carbon dioxide could
partially offset this factor by favoring incorporation
and loss with CO2.

7. Fermentation

pH
The pH range normally found in juice and must has
little effect on the rate of fermentation or on the synthesis
and release of aromatic compounds. Only at abnormally

(A) 8
7
Pressure (Bars)

The generation of carbon dioxide produces strong
convection currents within the ferment. These help
equilibrate the nutrient and temperature status
throughout the juice. However, the presence of a floating
or submerged cap disrupts equilibration in red musts
(see Fig. 7.46).
In vats, and in most tank fermentors, the carbon dioxide produced during fermentation is allowed to escape
into the surrounding air. When the gas is trapped, as during sparkling wine production, pressure rapidly rises
(Fig. 7.43A). At pressures above 700 kPa (w7 atm), yeast
growth ceases, although pressure-related effects have
been reported to begin at much lower pressures. Low
pH and high alcohol content increase yeast sensitivity
to CO2 pressure (Kunkee and Ough, 1966). This has its
most significant influence during the production of sparkling wines. Even pressures of 20 kPa, which are easily
found in young assemblage wines, can have a minor but
noticeable effect in slowing fermentation and cell division
(Fig. 7.43B). Pressures upward of 600 kPa are typically
reached by the end of the second in-bottle fermentation.
Nevertheless, the fermentative ability of yeasts may not
be completely inhibited until about 3000 kPa. In addition,
carbon dioxide accumulation may affect metabolism by
influencing the balance between carboxylation and decarboxylation reactions (Table 7.1). The effect of pressure on
the synthesis of aromatic compounds during vinification
appears not to have been investigated.
Some of the consequences of high pressure on cell
growth and metabolism may accrue from a decrease in
water viscosity (Bett and Cappi, 1965). This could
disrupt the intramolecular hydrogen bonding vital to
protein structure and function. In addition, critical
changes appear to involve damage to cellular organelles
(Iwahashi et al., 2003). Synthesis of HSPs (such as
HSP104) and trehalose can limit protein denaturation
(Hottiger et al., 1994) and stabilize membrane fluidity
(Iwahashi et al., 1995).
The pressure created by trapping the carbon dioxide
produced during fermentation has occasionally been
used to encourage a more constant rate of fermentation.
It also has been used to induce the premature termination of fermentation, leaving wine with a sweet finish.
However, care must be used with the latter. Spoilage
yeasts, such as Torulopsis and Kloeckera, are less sensitive
to high pressures than S. cerevisiae. Their production of
acetic acid could generate a vinegary taint. Caution
also needs to be taken because lactic acid bacteria (Lactobacillus) are little affected by the pressures that affect
wine yeasts (Dittrich, 1977).

6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Temps (jours)
Initial pressure : 2 bars
Initial pressure : 0.6 bar
Initial pressure : 0 bar

Initial pressure : 1.2 bars
Initial pressure : 0.2 bars

(B) 10

Yeast (106/mL)

526

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time (days)
Initial pressure : 2 bars
Initial pressure : 0.6 bar
Initial pressure : 0 bar

Initial pressure : 1.2 bars
Initial pressure : 0.2 bar

FIGURE 7.43 Increase in carbon dioxide pressure (A) and living
yeast cell number (B) during the second, in-bottle fermentation of
champagne, as a function of the initial concentration of carbon dioxide
in the cuvée. Modified from Valade, M., Bunner, D., Tribaut-Sohier, I.,
Tusseau, D., Moncomble, D., 2011. Le gaz carbonique et l’oxygène lors de
l’élaboration du champagne. Rev. Fr. Oenolog. 246 (avril/mai), 1e10,
reproduced with the permission of the Comité interprofessionnel du vin de
Champagne, France.

low pH values (<3.0) does fermentation begin to be
impeded. However, low pH may assist in the uptake
of some amino acids. It supplies protons used in activating transport across the cell membrane (Cartwright
et al., 1989).
The most important effects of pH on fermentation are
indirect, such as noted previously in discussing the antibiotic action of sulfur dioxide. The pH of juice also prevents many potentially competitive organisms from
growing in must or wine. In addition, pH affects the
stability of some fermentation by-products. The bestknown example relates to the hydrolysis of ethyl and acetate esters, in which breakdown occurs more rapidly at

527

Alcoholic fermentation

TABLE 7.1 Possible effects of carbon dioxide on key enzymes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Reaction

Comment
Reduced production of ethanol

Stimulation, less available pyruvate for ethanol production

Stimulation, less available pyruvate for ethanol production
Stimulation, less available pyruvate but malate enzyme level is not high
Stimulation, less available pyruvate but enzyme is repressed by glucose

Reduced production of biosynthetic precursors and thus cell yield will decrease; will
reduce rate of production of ethanol

From Jones, R.P., Pamment, N., Greenfield, P.F., 1981. Alcohol fermentation by yeasts e the effect of environmental and other variables. Process Biochem. 16, 42e49, reproduced by
permission.

low pH values. pH also has a marked effect on the coloration of anthocyanins and the relative oxidizability of
phenolic compounds.
Vitamins
Vitamins play a crucial role in the regulation of yeast
metabolism, functioning as coenzymes and enzyme precursors (Table 7.2). Although vitamins are not metabolized as energy sources, their concentrations decrease

markedly during fermentation (see Amerine and Joslyn,
1970). Yeast requirements typically are satisfied by either
biosynthesis or assimilation from the juice. Certain conditions can, however, significantly reduce their concentration or availability. Fatty acids produced during
fermentation can inhibit thiamine uptake; oversulfiting
(or long-term storage of grape juice at high sulfur dioxide concentrations) degrades thiamine; and grape infection (notably by Botrytis cinerea) or contamination of

TABLE 7.2 The role of vitamins in yeast metabolism.
Vitamin

Active form

Metabolic role

Optimum conc. (mg/L)

Biotin

Biotin

All carboxylation and
decarboxylation reactions

0.005e0.5

Pantothenate

Coenzyme A

Keto acid oxidation reactions;
fatty acid, amino acid,
carbohydrate, and choline
metabolism

0.2e2.0

Thiamine (B1)

Thiamine-pyrophosphate

Fermentative decarboxylation of
pyruvate; oxo acid oxidation and
decarboxylation

0.1e1.0

Pyridoxine

Pyridoxal phosphate

Amino acid metabolism;
deamination, decarboxylation,
and racemization reactions

0.1e1.0

p-Aminobenzoic acid and folic
acid

Tetrahydro-folate

Transamination; ergosterol
synthesis; transfer of one-carbon
units

0.5e5.0

Niacin (nicotinic acid)

NADþ, NADPþ

Dehydrogenation reactions

0.1e1.0

Riboflavin (B2)

FMN, FAD

Dehydrogenation reactions and
some amino acid oxidations

0.2e0.25

From Jones, R.P., Pamment, N., Greenfield, P.F., 1981. Alcohol fermentation by yeasts e the effect of environmental and other variables. Process Biochem. 16,
42e49, reproduced by permission.

528

7. Fermentation

stored juice by fungi and wild yeasts can lower vitamin
content. Under such conditions, a vitamin supplement
may improve fermentation or be required to reinitiate
stuck fermentation.
Adequate concentrations of thiamine reduce the synthesis of carbonyl compounds that bind to sulfur dioxide, thereby diminishing the amount of SO2 needed to
control spoilage organisms. In addition to limiting
carbonyl synthesis, thiamine also reduces the concentration and relative proportions of higher alcohols produced during fermentation. Although seldom a
problem, deficiencies in pyridoxine and pantothenic
acid can disrupt yeast metabolism, resulting in
increased hydrogen sulfide synthesis.
Occasionally, prophylactic vitamin addition is recommended in situations where sluggish or stuck fermentations are a recurring problem. Yeast extract, where
permitted, can be a good source of missing vitamins as
well as other nutrients. Although this is of value where
deficiencies are known, such supplements can increase
volatile acidity in some wines (Eglinton et al., 1993).
Inorganic elements
Inorganic elements are often essential components in
the active (catalytic) sites of enzymes. They also play
active roles in regulating cellular metabolism and maintaining cytoplasmic pH and ionic balance (Table 7.3). For
example, magnesium is involved in the catalytic action
of several key glycolytic enzymes and stabilizing membrane structure. As such, magnesium helps adapt yeast
cells to rapidly increasing alcohol concentrations (Dasari
et al., 1990), by limiting cell damage (Walker, 1998).
TABLE 7.3

Because calcium tends to restrict magnesium uptake, it
is important not to inadvertently augment calcium
levels (Birch et al., 2003), such as the addition of calcium
carbonate to neutralize excessive acidity.
Although inorganic elements are normally assumed
to be in adequate supply, there is difficulty in accurately
assessing yeast requirements and the available ion concentrations in grape juice and must. Not only do organic
compounds, such as amino acids, sequester elements,
thereby reducing their effective concentration, but ions
can antagonize each other’s uptake. Occasionally, as in
the case of potentially toxic aluminum ions, this may
be beneficial.
The abundance of potassium ions probably makes Kþ
the most significant metallic cation in juice and must.
High potassium contents can interfere with the efficient
uptake of amino acids, such as glycine (by limiting the
excretion of potassium that may be need to maintain
an acceptable ionic balance). Protons (Hþ) are simultaneously incorporated with glycine (Cartwright et al.,
1989). Abnormally high potassium contents may result
in sluggish or stuck fermentation, possibly due to the
joint uptake of potassium with glucose, and the subsequent decrease in external pH associated with the excretion of hydrogen ions to maintain cytoplasmic ionic
equilibrium (Kudo et al., 1998). High potassium concentrations can also generate tartrate instability, associated
with high juice and wine pH. High pH can also lead to
microbial instability, increasing the tendency of white
wines to brown, and inducing color instability in red
wines.

Major inorganic elements required for yeast growth and metabolism.

Ion

Role

þ

Concentration (mM)
þ

K

Enhances tolerance to toxic ions; involved in control of intercellular pH; K excretion is
used to counterbalance uptake of essential ions, e.g., Zn2þ, Co2þ; Kþ stabilizes optimum
pH for fermentation

20  103

Mg2þ

Levels regulated by divalent cation transport system; Mg2þ seems to buffer cell against
adverse environmental effects and is involved in activating sugar uptake

5  103

Ca2þ

Actively taken up by cells during growth and incorporated into cell wall proteins; Ca2þ
buffers cells against adverse environments; Ca2þ counteracts Mg2þ inhibition and
stimulates effect of suboptimal concentrations of Mg2þ

1.5  103

Zn2þ

Essential for glycolysis and for synthesis of some vitamins; uptake is reduced below pH
5, and two Kþ ions are excreted for each Zn2þ taken up

50

Mn2þ

Implicated in regulating the effects of Zn2þ; Mn2þ stimulates synthesis of proteins

15

Present in active site of many yeast proteins

10

Passively diffuses into cells; stimulates uptake of some sugars

0.25

Acts as counterion to movement of some positive ions

0.1

Stimulates growth at low concentrations

0.5

2þ

3þ

Fe , Fe
þ

Na



Cl

2þ

2þ

2þ

Mo , Co , B

From Jones, R.P., Pamment, N., Greenfield, P.F., 1981. Alcohol fermentation by yeasts e the effect of environmental and other variables. Process Biochem. 16, 42e49, reproduced by
permission.

Alcoholic fermentation

Temperature
Temperature is one of the most influential factors
affecting fermentation. Not only does it directly and
indirectly influence multiple aspects of yeast metabolism, but it is also one of the features over which the
winemaker has the greatest control.
At the upper and lower limits, temperature can cause
yeast death. However, inhibitory effects can be experienced well within these extremes. Relative tolerance to
high temperatures appears to depend, at least partially,
on production of a particular HSPdHSP104. This limits
or reverses the aggregation of essential cellular proteins
(Parsel et al., 1994). Increased fermentation temperatures also enhance the synthesis of HSP12, which helps
stabilize cell membrane lipids.
The disruptive influences of high temperatures are
increased under growth-limiting conditions, such as
the presence of ethanol and C8 to C10 carboxylic acids.
In contrast, low temperatures tend to diminish the toxic
effects of ethanol. This may be partially a consequence of
the higher proportion of unsaturated fatty acid residues
in the plasma membrane (Rose, 1989). This property
may help to explain the higher maximum viable cell
count at the end of fermentations conducted at cooler
temperatures (Ough, 1966a).
Yeast growth is particularly sensitive to the fermentation temperature during its exponential phase. For
example, cell division was found to occur every 12 h at
10 C, every 5 h at 20 C, and every 3 h at 30 C (Ough,
1966a). Michelet et al. (2004) report that with the commercial yeast strains they tested, all strains completed
fermentation without problems at either 12 or 20 C,
the differences being a slower completion at the cooler
temperature, and variation in their aromatic byproducts. Although strain response to temperature can
vary markedly, affecting strain proportions during
fermentation, the highest yeast populations may be
reached at 30 C (Torija et al., 2003).
At temperatures above 20 C, yeasts experience a
rapid decline in viability at the end of fermentation,
whereas at cooler temperatures, viability is enhanced.
Cool temperatures also prolong any fermentative lag
phase. For this reason, winemakers may warm white
juice to 20 C before adding the yeast inoculum. Once
fermentation has commenced, the juice may be cooled
to a preferred temperature.
The temperature at which active dry yeast is
rehydrated is critical, especially if cool fermentation
temperatures are intended (Llauradó et al., 2005).
It is important that rehydration occur at the recommended temperature, with slow acclimation to the
intended fermentation temperature. This minimizes
the likelihood of sluggish or stuck fermentation.
Growth and fermentation ability may also be assisted
by the addition of ergosterol, inactive dry yeasts, or
other constituents (Dı́az-Hellı́n et al., 2014).

529

Alternatively, or in addition, cryogenic yeast strains
or species may be chosen when cool fermentation temperatures are intended.
In addition to affecting growth and survival, temperature has many subtle, and not so subtle, effects
on yeast metabolism. One of the most marked is its influence on fermentation rate. A quick onset and
completion of fermentation have advantages. For
example, it limits juice oxidation and the growth of
epiphytic yeasts or those derived from the winery
environment. Thus, the preferred fermentation temperature may have little to do with the optimum for
ethanol production or yeast growth. Because yeast
strains differ in their temperature response, the overall optimum temperature for vinification can vary
widely. Equally, and potentially more significant, is
the temperature’s modulation of enzymatic pathways,
and their effects on flavor production, both beneficial
and detrimental.
The preference in most wine-producing regions is
to conduct white wine fermentations within a range
of 10e20 C. General consensus considers the wine’s
quality to be higher at the cooler end of this range
(e.g., du Plessis, 1983). Nonetheless, some European
regions still prefer fermentation temperatures within
the range of 20e25 C. Most New World winemakers
favor cooler temperatures because they yield fresher,
more fruity wines. These properties are highly valued
throughout much of the world. Freshness and fruitiness in young white wines is partially due to the
increased synthesis and retention of fruit esters, such
as isoamyl, isobutyl, and hexyl acetates (Fig. 7.44A).
Fatty acid ethyl esters may also contribute to a fruity
aspect, for example caproate and caprylate ethyl esters
possess apple-like aspects. Many of these ethyl esters
are produced more effectively at 15 C. In contrast, 2phenethyl acetate achieves its highest concentration
at 20 C (Fig. 7.44B). Production of ethanol and higher
alcohols may also be enhanced at cool temperatures.
Cooler fermentation temperatures also reduce the
release of yeast colloids, facilitating clarification. On
the negative side, cool temperatures slow fermentation, and may augment the likelihood of sluggish
fermentation. Where rapid or continuous monitoring
of fermentation is not possible, many small producers
choose a temperature that generates about 1% alcohol
per day.
Some of the effects noted above may result from the
influence of temperature on the indigenous yeast flora.
Cooler temperatures reduce both the growth rate and
toxicity of ethanol (Heard and Fleet, 1988). As a result,
species such as K. apiculata can remain active for a longer
period during the extended fermentation period. For
example, the indigenous flora appears to contribute
significantly to the highly desired fruityeflora character
of Riesling wines (Henick-Kling et al., 1998). Such

530

7. Fermentation

(A)
6.0

Isoamyl acetate mg/l

4.5

3.0

1.5

0
0

3

6

9

12

15

12

15

Ethanol % v/v

(B)
0.8

2–Phenethyl acetate mg/l

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

3

6

9

Ethanol % v/v

FIGURE 7.44 Effect of temperature and progress of fermentation
on isoamyl acetate (A) and 2-phenethyl acetate (B) content. C, 10 C;
B, 15 C; O, 20 C and ,, 30 C. From Killian, E., Ough, C.S., 1979.
Fermentation esters e formation and retention as affected by fermentation
temperature. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 301e305, reproduced by permission.

findings have encouraged the use of cool fermentation
temperatures and reduced sulfur dioxide addition.
The shift to cooler fermentation temperatures has
increased interest in the use of Saccharomyces bayanus
var. uvarum. Besides cryotolerance, these strains possess
several additional desirable features. For musts low in

total acidity, S. uvarum strains typically increase the malic acid content. Thus, a flat taste can be avoided by biological acidification. S. uvarum may also augment the
glycerol content; enhance the content of several aromatic
esters and succinic acid; and generate a lower alcohol
content (Massoutier et al., 1998).
Red wines are typically fermented at higher temperatures than white wines. Temperatures between 24 and
27 C are generally considered standard. Such temperatures favor not only anthocyanin but also tannin extraction. However, such temperatures are not universally
preferred. For example, wines made from Pinotage are
reportedly better when fermented at 15 C (du Plessis,
1983). The warmer temperatures generally preferred for
red wine production probably relates more to its effect
on phenol extraction than fermentation rate. Temperature
and alcohol are the major factors influencing pigment
and tannin extraction from seeds and skins. Both chemical groups dominate the characteristics of young red
wines. The potentially undesirable consequences of
higher fermentation temperatures, such as the production of increased amounts of acetic acid, acetaldehyde,
and acetoin, and lower concentrations of some esters,
are probably less noticeable against the more intense
fragrance of red wines. The greater synthesis of glycerol
at higher temperatures is often thought, probably unjustly, to give red wines a smoother mouthfeel.
Other important influences arise from factors not
directly related to the effect of temperature on fermentation. For example, temperature affects the rate of ethanol
loss during vinification (Williams and Boulton, 1983). The
volatilization of hydrophobic, low-molecular-weight
compounds such as esters is even more marked. Consequently, their dissipation has a greater potential impact
on the sensory quality of wine than the loss of ethanol.
During fermentation, much of the chemical energy
stored in grape sugars escapes as heat. It is estimated
that this is equivalent to about 23.5 kcal/mol glucose
(see Williams, 1982), resulting in a potential temperature
rise of 1.3 C per 100 g sugar. This is sufficient for juice at
23  Brix to potentially increase in temperature by about
30 C during fermentation. If this were to occur, yeast cells
would die before completing fermentation. In practice,
such temperature increases are not realized. Because
heat is liberated over several days to weeks, some of
the heat dissipates with escaping carbon dioxide and water vapor. Heat also radiates through the surfaces of the
fermentor into the cellar environment. Nevertheless, the
temperature rise can easily be in the range of 12e15 C,
sufficient to be critical to yeast survivaldif
temperature-control measures are not implemented.
Temperature control is also essential if the fermentation
temperature is intended to remain within a narrow range.
Critical to the importance in any heat buildup is the
initial temperature of the juice or must. This influences

531

Alcoholic fermentation

the rate of fermentation and correspondingly the rate at
which the temperature rises. Up to a point, the greater
the initial rate of fermentation, the sooner a lethal temperature may be reached. Thus, cool temperatures at
the beginning of fermentation can diminish the degree
and sophistication of any temperature control required.
Also important to temperature control is the size and
shape of the fermentor, and the presence or absence of a
cap. The rate of heat lost is often directly related to the
surface area/volume ratio of the fermentor. By retaining
heat, the volume of juice can significantly affect the rate
of fermentationdthe larger the fermentor, the greater
the heat retention and likelihood of overheating. This
feature is illustrated in Fig. 7.45.
Another issue is the development and maintenance of
a relatively uniform temperature throughout the
fermentor. The turbulence induced by the tumultuous
release of carbon dioxide during fermentation may be
sufficient to achieve uniformity. This is often the case
in producing white and rosé wines, in which vertical
and lateral temperature variation is little more than
1 C. At cool fermentation temperatures, however, turbulence may be insufficient to equilibrate the temperature
throughout the fermentor, and temperature stratification
may develop.
With red wines, cap formation disrupts the effective
circulation and mixing of the must. The cap-to-liquid
temperature difference may reach 10 C (Fig. 7.46).

Without mixing, the temperature differential may reach
its maximum within 3 days, declining progressively
thereafter to about 3.5 C after 6 days (Vannobel, 1986).
Further details on the potential for vertically and horizontally temperature variations throughout the must
are illustrated in Fig. 7.47. Periodic punching down produces only transitory temperature equilibration between the cap and the juice; full pumping over is
required to reduce temperature differences to less than
5 C. In contrast, little temperature variation exists
within the main volume of the must. Because high cap
temperatures are a common feature of many traditional
red wine fermentations, these vinifications may consist
of two simultaneous but distinct phasesda liquid phase,
in which the temperature is cooler and changes less during fermentation, and a largely uncontrolled hightemperature phase in the cap (Vannobel, 1986). Because
the rate of fermentation is more rapid in the cap, the
alcohol content rises quickly to above 10%. The higher
temperatures found in the cap, plus the association of
alcohol, probably increase the speed and efficiency of
phenol extraction from the seeds and skins trapped in
the cap. This feature is presumably absent or much
diminished where the cap is submerged or where

Cap

Liquid

100
(38)

300

At center

240
0.75 m
0.50 m
180
0.25 m
120
0.25 m DIA
60
0.50 m
1.0 m
0
0

30

60

90

8 in. from wall

9
(35)
Temperature, (C°) °F

Sugar (g/liter) temperature (deg C×10)

1.0 m DIA

90
(32)

85
(29)

0.75 m
120

150

Time (hr)

FIGURE 7.45 Effect of barrel diameter on fermentation rate and
temperature rise during fermentation. Although the data are not presented in terms of cooperage capacity, barrels possessing maximum
diameters of 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0 m could have capacities in the range
50e75, 225e500, and 800e1200 L, respectively, depending on barrel
height and stave length. From Boulton, R., 1979. The heat transfer
characteristics of wine fermen tors. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 152e156, reproduced by permission.

80
(27) 0

5
10
(12.7) (25.4)

15
(38)

20
25
(50.8) (63.5)

30
(76)

35
(89)

Depth below cap surface, (cm) in.

FIGURE 7.46 Vertical temperature profile through cap and liquid
at 40 h. Crosshatching indicates that the boundary between the cap and
liquid is not sharply defined. From Guymon, J.F., Crowell, E.A., 1977.
The nature and cause of cap-liquid temperature differences during wine
fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 28, 74e78, reproduced by permission.

532

7. Fermentation

FIGURE 7.47 Spatial distribution of temperatures during a 3450-L Pinot noir fermentation. Temperature measurements were taken at
approximately 24 h intervals at the time indicated (arrows) in the appropriate fermentation curve (E). From Schmid, F., Schadt, J., Jiranek, V., Block,
D.E., 2009. Formation of temperature gradients in large- and small-scale red wine fermentations during cap management. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 15,
249e255, reproduced by permission.

automatic punching down, pumping over, or rotary fermentors are used to diminish the temperature and associated differences between cap and main must volume.
There appears to have been little investigation of the
sensory consequences of current cap submerging techniques. This also applies to older procedures, where
incomplete and intermittent cap disruption resulted in
fermentation occurring at varying temperatures within
the cap and juice, respectively.
Temperature regulation is achieved by a variety of
procedures. Selective harvest timing has the potential
to provide fruit at a desired temperature, obviating at
least the need for juice or must cooling. For centuries,
relatively small fermentors, and vinification in cool cellars achieved a degree of natural temperature control.
Pumping over in red wine vinification is another procedure that provides a degree of cooling, in addition to
its main role of submerging the cap. However, the maintenance of fermentation temperatures within a select,
narrow range requires direct cooling in all but small barrels in cool cellars. Although estimated to cost up to
about 50% of a winery’s electricity bill, cooling is often
considered money well spent.
If heat transfer through the fermentor wall is sufficiently rapid, cooling the fermentor surface with water
or by passing a coolant through an insulating jacket, can
be effective. If thermal conductance is insufficient, fermenting must can be pumped through external heat exchangers, or cooling coils may be inserted directly into
the fermentor. Alternatively, pumps providing additional
agitation may avoid temperature stratification throughout
the fermentor. In special fermentors, trapping carbon dioxide, and the associated pressure buildup, can be used
to slow fermentation, minimizing heat accumulation.
Pesticide residues
Under most situations, no more than trace amounts of
pesticide residues are found in juice or must. At such
concentrations, they have little or no perceptible effect

on fermentation, wine quality, or human health. Used
properly, pesticides help the fruit reach maximal quality,
and reduce the risks of mycotoxin contamination. When
used in excess or applied just before harvest, pesticides
can negatively affect winemaking and potentially pose
health risks.
Various factors influence pesticide residues on or in
fruit. For example, heavy rains or sprinkler irrigation
can wash contact pesticides off the fruit. Rain has less effect on systemic pesticides (those absorbed into plant tissues). Solar ultraviolet radiation degrades some
pesticides, decreasing their residues. Epiphyte and plant
metabolic decomposition are also possible.
Crushing, and especially maceration, can influence the
incorporation of crop-protection chemicals into the must.
Depending on the fungicide, extended maceration can
either increase or decrease the amount found in the juice.
Maceration generally has little effect on the content of systemic pesticides as they are already in the juice before
crushing.
Clarification by cold settling, clarifying agents, or
centrifugation significantly reduces the concentration
of contact fungicides, such as elemental sulfur, but has
little effect on most systemic pesticide residues
(Fig. 7.48). The persistence of pesticide residues, once
dissolved, depends largely on their stability under the
physicochemical conditions found in the ferment and/
or wine. For example, more than 70% of dichlofluanid
residues are degraded under the acidic conditions found
in juice and wine (Wenzel et al., 1980). In contrast, differences in racking, clarification, and filtration procedures
did not markedly reduce the concentrations of chlorpyrifos, fenarimol, vinclozolin, metalaxyl, mancozeb, and
penconazole (Navarro et al., 1999). Nevertheless, for
many commonly used pesticides, degradation or precipitation reduce their levels in finished wine to trace or undetectable levels (Sala et al., 1996; Fernández et al., 2005).
There are also investigations into the value of washing
grapes with a 1% solution of citric acid before crushing

533

Alcoholic fermentation

Sulfur

Iprodione
procymidone
vinclozolin

Dichlofluanid
phtalimide

Soluble systemic
fungicides

100

% Residue

80

Before must
clarification

60

40

After must
clarification

20

FIGURE 7.48 Influence of must settling on the elimination of various fungicides employed in viticulture. From Gnaegi, F., Aerny, J., Bolay, A.,
Crettenand, J., 1983. Influence des traitements viticoles antifongiques sur la vinification et la qualité du vin. Rev. Suisse Vitic. Arboric. Hortic. 15, 243e250,
reproduced by permission.

sulfide favors the subsequent production of mercaptans,
residual copper can limit mercaptan synthesis by forming
insoluble cupric sulfide with H2S. Vinclozolin (Ronilan)
and iprodione (Rovral) occasionally appear to affect
fermentation and may induce the development of offflavors (San Romáo and Coste Belchior, 1982). In addition,
fungicides may occasionally react with varietal flavor
constituents, reducing their impact. The primary example
is copper (derived from Bordeaux mixture). It can reduce
the content of 4-mercapto-4-methylpentan-2-one (4MMP) in Sauvignon blanc wines (Hatzidimitriou et al.,
1996). Copper reacts with 4-MMP during alcoholic
fermentation and may also interfere with the synthesis
of its precursor during grape maturation. Demonstration
that newer fungicides are inactive against yeasts is often a
requirement for registration of use on grapes.
Fungicides may have selective effects on the
endemic yeasts during vinification. For example,
captan favors the growth of Torulopsis bacillaris by

H2S [μg/L]

(Cavazza et al., 2007). Initial results appeared
encouraging.
Of pesticide residues, fungicides not surprisingly have
the greatest effect on yeasts. Newer fungicides, such as
metalaxyl (Ridomil) and cymoxanil (Curzate), do not
appear to affect fermentation. In contrast, triadimefon
(Bayleton) can depress fermentation, presumably by disrupting sterol metabolism. Older, broad-spectrum fungicides, such as dinocap, captan, mancozeb, and maneb,
generally are toxic to yeasts. Copper residues from the
application of copper sulfate fungicides increasingly suppress fermentation at concentrations above 10 mg/L (Sun
et al., 2016). Residual elemental sulfur seldom have a significant effect, apart from at abnormally high concentrations (Conner, 1983). Tolerance to sulfur may be related
to the relative insensitivity of wine yeasts to other sulfur
compounds, notably sulfur dioxide.
Fungicides can have several direct and indirect effects
on fermentation. Delaying the start of fermentation is
probably the most common. As this primarily affects
the lag phase, subsequent fermentation is unaffected.
Increasing the inoculum size (5e10 g/hL active dry
yeast) avoids most fungicide-induced suppression of
fermentation (Lemperle, 1988). The increased yeast population reduces the amount of fungicide available to
react with each cell. Occasionally, the onset of fermentation occurs normally, but the rate is depressed (Gnaegi
et al., 1983). Such suppression may result in stuck
fermentation.
Fungicides may affect the sensory qualities of wine by
influencing the relative activities of various yeasts and
their biosynthetic pathways. Where residues are sufficient, elemental sulfur can augment the synthesis of
hydrogen sulfide in some yeast strains (Fig. 7.49), as can
Bordeaux mixture, folpet, and zineb. Although hydrogen

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

St. 3, Control
St. 2, 10 mg/L elem.S
St. 3, 10 mg/L elem.S
St. 5, 10 mg/L elem.S
St. 6, 10 mg/L elem.S

68°Oe
pH 3,2
Temperature 20 °C

0

5

10

15

20

Time [days]

FIGURE 7.49 Influence of yeast strain on the production of H2S
during fermentation after the addition of elemental sulfur. Modified
from Rauhut, D., Kürbel, H., 1994. Die Entstehung von H2S aus
Netzschwefel-Rückständen während der Gärung und dessen Einfluß auf die
Bildung von böckserverursachenden schwefelhaltigen Metaboliten in Wein.
Wein-Wiss. 29, 27e36, reproduced by permission.

534

7. Fermentation

suppressing the growth of most other yeast species
(Minárik and Rágala, 1966). Several herbicides (2,4dichlorophenoxyacetic acid [2,4-D] and simazine),
and most insecticides do not disrupt yeast fermentation (Conner, 1983; Cabras et al., 1995).
Stuck and sluggish fermentation
Stuck fermentation refers to premature termination
before all but trace amounts of fermentable sugars
have been metabolized. Both stuck and sluggish fermentations have been problems since time immemorial. Historically, their occurrence was usually
attributed to overheating during fermentation. In the
absence of adequate cooling, fruit harvested and fermented under hot conditions can readily overheat
and fermentation become stuck. The resulting wines
are high in residual sugar and low in alcohol content,
making them unacceptable as a table wine as well as
highly susceptible to microbial spoilage. Instability is
increased further if the grapes are low in acidity, high
in pH, or both.
The current extensive use of temperature control has
essentially eliminated overheating as a significant factor
in stuck fermentation. Ironically, the application of cooling has favored the incidence of other causes of stuck
and sluggish fermentations. The desire to accentuate
the fresh, fruity character of white wines has encouraged
the use of cool temperatures. This can limit yeast growth
and potentially favor microbial contaminants that
further retard growth. The search for enhanced freshness has also induced some winemakers to use excessive
juice clarification, either with bentonite, centrifugation,
or similar procedures. The resulting loss of sterols, unsaturated fatty acids, and nitrogenous nutrients can increase yeast sensitivity to the combined toxicity of
ethanol and carboxylic acids, notably octanoic and decanoic acids and their esters. The latter enhance ethanolinduced leakage of amino acids and other nutrients (Sá
Correia et al., 1989). Octanoic acid and other stress factors such as ethanol, high temperature, and nitrogen
deficiency also cause a reduction in intracellular pH
and associated enzymic and membrane dysfunction
(see Viegas et al., 1998). Crushing, pressing, and other
prefermentative activities scrupulously conducted in
the absence of oxygen heighten these effects. Molecular
oxygen is required for the biosynthesis of sterols and
long-chain unsaturated fatty acids essential for cellmembrane synthesis and function.
Juice from overmature and botrytized grapes generally has a very high sugar content. The resulting osmotic
influence can partially plasmolyze yeast cells, resulting in
slow or incomplete fermentation. In addition, overmature grapes may have an unusually low glucose/fructose
ratio, a situation correlated with stuck fermentation in
Switzerland (Schütz and Gafner, 1993b). It was solved
by the addition of glucose to reestablish a more typical ratio. Overmaturity can also be associated with reduced

ammonia and amino acid content. This is further exacerbated in botrytized juice, which tends to have even lower
available nitrogen as well as thiamine contents. The activity of indigenous yeasts can also reduce thiamine content,
thereby suppressing the activity of S. cerevisiae (Bataillon
et al., 1996). Nutrient depletion adds to the combined
inhibitory effects of high sugar contents and the toxicity
of ethanol and C8 and C10 saturated carboxylic acids.
Because these effects are well known, the juice is usually
supplemented with DAP and thiamine. More difficult to
counter are the inhibitory polysaccharides produced by
B. cinerea (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 1979), and the disruptive
action of acetic acid released by acetic acid bacteria. Uptake of acetic acid can decrease the pH of yeast cytoplasm
from about 7.2 to below 6. This disrupts protein function,
notably the glycolytic enzyme enolase (Pampulha and
Loureiro-Dias, 1990). The presence of 105e106 acetic
acid bacteria/mL can be lethal to S. cerevisiae (Grossman
and Becker, 1984). Some of this effect may be caused by
activation of a prion (GARþ) in some strain of
S. cerevisiae (Walker et al., 2016). Activation reduced
fermentative capacity and occurred especially in the
absence of sulfur dioxide.
If the juice is insufficiently protected by sulfur dioxide, and its pH is sufficiently high, indigenous lactobacilli may produce enough acetic acid to retard or
inhibit fermentation. The best confirmed inhibitor is
Lactobacillus kunkeei (Huang et al., 1996). Adding sulfur
dioxide is the best-known means of controlling this relatively rare spoilage bacterium (Edwards et al., 1999).
Conversely, excessive addition of sulfur dioxide can
retard the growth of inoculated yeasts. Thus, as so often,
sulfur dioxide should be employed judiciously, based on
need not habit.
Another potential cause of stuck fermentation involves killer yeasts. Killer yeasts produce a protein typically toxic to similar yeasts that do not produce the
protein. This feature is associated with joint infection
by a mycovirus and a satellite dsRNA. The mycovirus
is considered a helper, regulating replication and encapsulation of the satellite dsRNA. The latter synthesizes a
toxic protein. Although most killer proteins act only on
the same species, forms are known that are active
against other yeasts as well as filamentous fungi and
bacteria (see Magliani et al., 1997). These do not appear
to be important in wine fermentations.
Under worst-case scenarios (low inocula with highly
sensitive strains or continuous fermentation), killer
yeasts can replace inoculated strains, even when the
initial concentration of the killer strain is as low as
0.1% (Jacobs and van Vuuren, 1991). Killer S. cerevisiae
strains may cause sluggish or stuck fermentations as
well as donate undesirable sensory attributes (Maqueda
et al., 2012). Even more serious are situations where potential spoilage yeasts, notably Kloeckera apiculata or
Zygosaccharomyces bailii, possess killer factors that can
inactivate S. cerevisiae.

Alcoholic fermentation

Most killer yeast problems can largely be countered
by inoculation with commercial strains, constructed to
possess both common killer satellite dsRNAs strains
(K1 and K2) (Boone et al., 1990; Sulo et al., 1992).
Possession of the killer factor protects the producing
cell from the effects of the toxin. Addition of sulfur dioxide may also suppress killer yeasts in the indigenous
flora, if combined with inoculation with a resistant
wine yeast strain. Temperature control and the addition
of bentonite can also reduce the activity of killer
proteins.
Killer properties have been isolated from naturally
occurring S. cerevisiae strains in wine as well as other
yeast genera (e.g., Hansenula, Pichia, Torulopsis, Candida,
and Kluyveromyces). Although relatively uncommon,
yeast strains resistant to killer toxins have been found
that do not possess the killer factor. These are termed
neutral strains. Typically, yeasts immune to a particular
killer protein possess the gene that produces it.
Expression of the killer factor can vary among various
yeasts. In S. cerevisiae, both K1 and K2 strains are associated with a helper virus of the Totiviridae group,
whereas in Kluyveromyces lactis, linear dsDNA plasmids
control the property. In some genera, chromosomal
genes may be involved. In all cases, the toxic principle
is associated with the production and release of a protein
or glycoprotein.
With K1 and K2 toxins, toxicity involves the attachment of the protein to b-1,6-D-glucans of the cell wall.
Subsequently, the toxin binds with a component of the
cell membrane. It induces the formation of a pore,
permitting unregulated ion movement across the membrane. The consequence is cell death. The nuclear genes
that encode the killer proteins KHR and KHS are less
well known, but also result in an increase in ion permeability of sensitive cells. In contrast, the K28 toxin attaches to a-1,3-mannose of cell-wall mannoproteins. It
inhibits DNA synthesis and further cell division of the
affected cell.
The killer proteins produced by S. cerevisiae, notably
K1, act optimally at a pH above that normally found in
wine. Consequently, K2 is of greater significance to
wine production. Cells appear to be most sensitive during the exponential growth phase, when the growing tip
of buds provide b-1,6-D-glucan receptors in close proximity to the cell membrane. Thus, the significance of
killer toxins depends on juice pH, the addition of
protein-binding substances (such as bentonite or yeast
hulls), the ability of killer strains to ferment effectively,
and the number of division cycles wine yeasts undergo
during fermentation.
In general, the incidence of stuck fermentation may
also be reduced by: limiting prefermentative clarification (restricting nutrient depletion); moderate aeration
(w5 mg O2/liter) at the end of the exponential growth
phase; the addition of ergosterol or long-chain

535

unsaturated fatty acids (i.e., oleic, linoleic, or linolenic
acids); the addition of yeast ghosts or other absorptive
materials, such as bentonite (associated with agitation
to assure adequate mixing); or the addition of ammonium salts periodically or halfway through fermentation. The addition of absorptive substances, such as
yeast hulls, appears to have optimal effects when
applied midway or near the end of exponential growth.
The need for such treatments can be partially predicted by discovering the root cause(s) of past instances of stuck or sluggish fermentations. This is
greatly aided by close scrutiny, and recording, of the
conditions and dynamics of fermentation. These details provide a basis for diagnosing the cause(s), the
commencement of early corrective measures, or preventive actions in the future. Yeast analysis may also
provide additional clues. For example, specific
genes are activated under low-nitrogen conditions
(Mendes-Ferreira et al., 2007).
Bisson and Butzke (2000) have divided problem fermentations into four categories: slow initiation (eventually becoming normal); continuously sluggish; typical
initiation, but becoming sluggish; and normal initiation
but abrupt termination. Their studies indicate that
comparing sugar consumption, temperature, nutrient
profiles, and records of procedures used in previous fermentations often provides early indications of potential
problems and their possible quick resolution. Once
fermentation has stopped, reinitiation is more
complicated.
When stuck fermentation occurs, successful reinitiation usually requires incremental reinoculation with
special yeast strains, following racking off from the
settled lees (see Bisson and Butzke, 2000). The special
strains usually possess high ethanol tolerance as well
as greater ability to utilize fructose (the sugar whose
proportion can increase markedly during fermentation).
The latter property appears to depend on the mutated
activity of one of the multiple sugar transport proteins
located in the plasma membranedHXT3 (Guillaume
et al., 2007). The inoculum appears to be more successful
if it is derived from colonies harvested in their stationary
phase and exposed to ethanol (Santos et al., 2008). The
addition of nutrients (if deficient), yeast hulls (to remove
toxic fatty acids), must aeration, and adjustment of the
fermentation temperature (if necessary) usually
achieves successful refermentation.
Ideally, treatment should be based on the cause. However, this usually requires access to rapid laboratory
analysis. Although available in large wineries, this
may not be an option for small wineries. In this instance,
use of one of the many commercial preparations for
stuck fermentation is about the only solution once
fermentation has ceased.
Typically, vintners do their best to avoid stuck
fermentation. However, in the production of certain

536

7. Fermentation

specialty sweet wines, premature termination can be
intentionaldusually by chilling and clarification to
remove the yeasts. It achieves the low alcohol, high residual sweetness desired. Because such wines are
particularly sensitive to microbial spoilage, stringent
measures must be employed to counteract spoilage.

Malolactic fermentation
After years of intensive investigation, the desirability of malolactic fermentation is finally becoming
less controversial. The contention related to its seemingly capricious naturedat times improving quality,
at others degrading. How the “second” fermentation
was perceived has also varied historically. Pliny (Historia Naturalis 14.25) considered it undesirable, as did
Jullien (1817), (page 125). However Chaptal et al.,
1801, (page 140) considered it beneficial. Such divergence probably relates to their referring to different
events, some probably caused by spoilage organisms.
In addition, wines in which a second fermentation (if
malolactic) had beneficial effects occurred erratically,
whereas conditions that favored its frequent occurrence
could often have undesirable consequences.
The principal effects of malolactic fermentation are
a rise in pH and a reduction in perceived acidity.
This involves the decarboxylation of a dicarboxylic
acid (malic acid) to a monocarboxylic acid (lactic
acid). This replaces the harsher taste of malic acid
with the less aggressive sensation of lactic acid. The
malic acid content usually is reduced to less than
300 mg/L.
Winemakers in most cool wine-producing regions
(where high acidity is usually associated with residual
malic acid) tend to view malolactic fermentation positively, especially for red wines. Nonetheless, raising
the pH can result in a loss in color depth. Conversely,
wines produced in warm regions may be low in acidity,
high in pH, or both. Thus, malolactic fermentation can

ILLUSTRATION 7.3 The deacidification of wine involving the
decarboxylation of malic acid to lactic acid.

aggravate an already difficult situation, potentially
leaving the wine tasting “flat,” with undesired flavors,
and microbially unstable.
Originally, deacidification was considered the paramount benefit of malolactic fermentation. More recently,
many winemakers have begun to view it as a means of
adjusting and improving wine flavor. For example, it is
thought to reduce the incidence of vegetal notes and
accentuate fruit flavors (Laurent et al., 1994). Nonetheless, the reverse may occur (see below). Malolactic
fermentation is most commonly promoted in red wines
but is also being encouraged with some white wines.
Where desired, and for wines marginally high in pH,
tartaric acid may be added prior to inducing malolactic
fermentation.

Lactic acid bacteria
Lactic acid bacteria are characterized by several
unique properties. As their name implies, a major byproduct of their metabolism is lactic acid. On this regard,
they are typically classified as to whether the ferment
sugars to lactic acid or a combination of lactic acid,
ethanol, and carbon dioxide. The former mechanism is
termed homofermentation, whereas the latter is called
heterofermentation. Homofermentation potentially
yields two ATPs per glucose (similar to yeast fermentation), whereas heterofermentation yields but one ATP.
Species possessing either type of fermentation can
grow in wine.
The most beneficial member of the group, from an
enologic perspective, is a heterofermentative speciesd
Oenococcus oeni (formerly Leuconostoc oenos). Recently,
its genome has been deciphered (Mills et al., 2005). It
contains 1701 ORFs (open reading frames). Of these,
75% have been classified as related to functional genes.
This information is facilitating the study of its physiology and genetic diversity.
Not only is O. oeni the species most frequently found
in wine, it is also the only species inducing malolactic
fermentation in wines at a pH  3.5. It is also more
tolerant to ethanol, low temperatures, and sulfur dioxide than most lactic acid bacteria. Nonetheless, interest
is being shown in the use of Lactobacillus plantarum,
alone or in combination with O. oeni, especially with
wines with a pH  3.5. L. plantarum also produces a
b-D-glucosidase that can release glycosidically bound aromatic compounds.
Usually, though, most Lactobacillus and Pediococcus
spp. are viewed as spoilage organisms (see the section
on “Lactic acid bacteria” in Chapter 8). Lactobacillus
contains both homo- and heterofermentative

Malolactic fermentation

members, whereas Pediococcus spp. are strictly
homofermentative.
Although lactic acid bacteria are categorized on the
basis of sugar fermentation, the extent to which sugar
metabolism is important to their growth in wine is unclear. Even dry wines, possessing primarily trace
amounts of pentose sugars, can support considerable
bacterial growth. Intriguingly, the concentration of hexose sugars (glucose and fructose) may increase marginally during malolactic fermentation (Davis et al., 1986a).
This increase, however, is apparently unrelated to malolactic fermentation, as it can occur in its absence.
Lactic acid bacteria are further distinguished as a
group by their limited biosynthetic abilities. They
require a complex set of nutrients including B vitamins,
purine and pyrimidine bases, and several amino acids.
Indicative of their limited synthetic capabilities is their
inability to synthesize heme proteins. As a consequence,
they produce neither cytochromes nor catalase (both
heme proteins). Without cytochromes, lactic acid bacteria cannot respire. Consequently, their energy metabolism is strictly fermentative.
Most bacteria incapable of synthesizing heme molecules are strict anaerobesdthat is, they are unable to
grow in the presence of oxygen. Oxygen reacts with
certain cytoplasmic components, notably flavoproteins,
producing toxic oxygen radicals (superoxide and
peroxide). In aerobic organisms, superoxide dismutase
and catalase rapidly inactivate these toxic radicals.
Anaerobic bacteria produce neither enzyme. Lactic
acid bacteria escape the fate of most anaerobic bacteria
in the presence of oxygen (death) by accumulating large
quantities of Mn2þ ions and producing peroxidase.
Manganese detoxifies superoxide by converting it back
to oxygen. The rapid action of manganese also limits
the synthesis of hydrogen peroxide from superoxide.
Peroxidase rapidly detoxifies any hydrogen peroxide
that does form by oxidizing it to water in the presence
of organic compounds. Lactic acid bacteria are the
only procaryotes that are both strictly fermentative and
able to grow in the presence of oxygen.
Although fermentative metabolism is an inefficient
means of generating biologically useful energy, the production of large amounts of acidic wastes quickly lowers
the pH of most substrates. As a consequence, the growth
of most potentially competitive bacteria is arrested. Lactic acid bacteria are one of the few bacterial groups
capable of growing below pH 5. Although lactic acid
bacteria grow under acidic conditions, growth is still
comparatively poor at the low pH values typical of
must and wine. For example, species of Lactobacillus
and Pediococcus commonly cease growth below pH 3.5.

537

Even Oenococcus oeni, the primary malolactic bacterium,
is inhibited by pH values below 3.0e2.9. O. oeni grows
optimally within a pH range of 4.5e5.5. Thus, a major
benefit of malolactic fermentation for the bacterium
(other than generating ATP) is surprisingly acid reduction (producing conditions more suitable to its growth).
By metabolizing malic to lactic acid, the number of
carboxyl groups is halved, acidity is reduced, and the
pH raised. The degradation of arginine, one of the major
amino acids in must and wine, releases ammonia, which
may also help raise the pH.
Another distinctive feature of lactic acid bacteria is
the malolactic enzyme. Unlike other enzymes converting malic to lactic acid, the reaction decarboxylates Lmalic acid to L-lactic acid, without free intermediates.
The enzyme functions in a two-step process. First, malic
acid is decarboxylated to pyruvic acid (which remains
bound to the enzyme). Then, pyruvic acid is reduced
to lactic acid. ATP is generated through the joint export
of lactic acid and hydrogen ions (protons) from the cell
(Henick-Kling, 1995). The hydrogen ions that accumulate outside the cell are sufficient to activate the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP in the cell membrane, as
protons move back into the cytoplasm. Alternatively,
lactic acid may be generated either by decarboxylating
malic acid to pyruvic acid (and its subsequent reduction
to lactic acid) or via its dehydrogenation to oxaloacetate
(followed by decarboxylation to pyruvate and reduction
to lactic acid).
Another energy-yielding mechanism is associated
with the metabolism of citric acid. Its catabolism appears
to assist glucose utilization, increasing growth (Ramos
and Santos, 1996). Small amounts of reducing energy
(NADH) may also result from the action of a minor alternative oxidative pathway.
Although the decarboxylation of malic acid to lactic
acid is central to the enologic importance of malolactic
fermentation, malic acid is not the primary energy
source for lactic acid bacteria. Currently, the primary energy source for bacterial growth in wine remains uncertain. This may be because the source changes
throughout growthdinitially involving small amounts
of sugars (exponential phase), followed by malic acid
(early stationary phase), and subsequently by citric
acid (late stationary phase) (Krieger et al., 2000). However, data from Henick-Kling (1995) supports the view that
much of the ATP required for growth/maintenance during the log and stationary phases of malolactic fermentation comes from malic acid catabolism (Henick-Kling,
1995). Nonetheless, the situation is complicated by the
pronounced influence of pH on the ability of bacteria to
ferment sugars, and the marked variability among

538

7. Fermentation

strains. Oenococcus oeni shows little ability to ferment
sugars, at least below pH 3.5 (Davis et al., 1986a; Firme
et al., 1994). However, data from Liu et al. (1995) suggest
that sugars may be the primary carbon and energy sources for the bacterium’s slow-growth phase. Growth may
be increased by the joint metabolism of several compounds, such as glucose with fructose or citrate. This improves their redox balance and increases ATP production.
The metabolism of citric acid also has sensory significance. It is the prime source of the diacetyl, acetoin (Shimazu et al., 1985), and acetic acid generated during
malolactic fermentation. Citric acid fermentation is
enhanced by the presence of phenolic compounds
(Rozès et al., 2003) as well as ethanol (Olguı́n et al., 2009).
Amino acids, notably arginine, may also act as energy
sources (Liu and Pilone, 1998). Thus, the degradation of
yeast and grape proteins may be important, both in
terms of energy generation and providing essential
growth factors (Manca de Nadra et al., 1999).
All lactic acid bacteria assimilate acetaldehyde and
other carbonyl compounds. However, their metabolism
may retard malolactic fermentation. It may accrue
from inhibitory amounts of sulfur dioxide being liberated by the catabolic degradation of carbonyl sulfonates
(Wells and Osborne, 2011)da microbial trojan horse.
Anaerobic bacterial metabolism, as with its yeast
counterpart, can result in the generation of an excess

of NAD(P)H. To maintain an acceptable redox balance,
lactic acid bacteria must regenerate NAD(P)þ. How lactic acid bacteria accomplish this in wine is unclear. Some
species reduce fructose to mannitol, presumably for this
purpose (Nielsen and Richelieu, 1999; Richter et al.,
2003). This may explain the common occurrence of
mannitol in wine associated with malolactic fermentation. Some strains also regenerate NAD(P)þ with flavoproteins and oxygen. This reaction probably accounts
for the reported improvement in malolactic fermentation in the presence of trace amounts of oxygen. However, oxygen also inactivates the pathway reducing
pyruvate to ethanoldone of the means by which
O. oeni regenerates NAD(P)þ for the metabolism of
glucose.
In addition to important physiological differences,
morphological features help to distinguish the various
genera (Fig. 7.50). Oenococcus usually consists of spherical to lens-shaped cells (Plate 7.7). They commonly
occur in pairs or chains but occasionally singly. Leuconostoc mesenteroides, closely related to Oenococcus, is similarly shaped and may also be isolated from wine.
Pediococcus species usually occur as packets of four
spherical cells. Lactobacillus produces long, slender, occasionally bent, rod-shaped cells commonly occurring in
chains. Some of the more common lactic acid bacteria
that may occur in wine are noted in Table 7.4.

FIGURE 7.50 Micrographs of important members of the Lactobacillaceae found in wine: (A) Oenococcus oeni (6000); (B) Lactobacillus casei
(8500); (C) Lactobacillus brevis (5500); (D) Pediococcus cerevisiae (5000). Cell shape and grouping may depend on the medium in which the
bacteria grew. From Radler, F., 1972. Problematik des bakteriellen Säureabbaus. Weinberg Keller 19, 357e370, reproduced by permission of Dr Radler.

Malolactic fermentation

539

tartaric acid in the juice, the less likely malolactic
fermentation will significantly affect the acidity and
pH of the wine.
As the pH of wine changes, so too do the relative concentrations of the various colored and uncolored forms
of anthocyanins. The metabolism of carbonyl compounds (notably acetaldehyde) by lactic acid bacteria,
and the accompanying release of SO2 bound to them,
can result in pigment bleaching. In general, color loss
associated with malolactic fermentation is sensorially
significant only in pale-colored wines or those with an
initially high pH.
Microbial stability

PLATE 7.7 Scanning electron micrograph of Oenococcus oeni. Photo
courtesy Lallemand.

Effects of malolactic fermentation
Bacterial malolactic fermentation has three distinct,
but interrelated, effects on wine quality. It reduces acidity, influences microbial stability, and affects the wine’s
sensory attributes.
Acidity
Deacidification and a rise in pH are the most consistent effects of malolactic fermentation. This adjustment
usually does not commence until the bacterial population has reached a threshold of about 108 cells per mL.
A reduction in acidity increases the smoothness and
drinkability of red wines but can generate a flat taste
in wines marginally low in acidity. The desirability of
deacidification depends primarily on the initial pH
and acidity of the grapes. Typically, the higher the acidity and the lower the pH, the greater the benefit;
conversely, the lower the acidity and higher the pH,
the greater the likelihood of undesirable consequences.
In addition, the higher the relative proportion of
TABLE 7.4 Lactic acid bacteria occurring in wine.
Genus

Species

Oenococcus

O. oenos

Pediococcus

P. pentosaceus, P. damnosus (P.
cerevisiae), P. parvulus

Lactobacillus

L. plantarum, L. brevis, L. cellobiosis,
L. buchneri, L. casei, L. hilgardii, L.
trichodes, L. mesenteroides

Formerly, increased microbial stability was considered one of the prime benefits of malolactic fermentation. This view still holds, but its relative significance
is now in some doubt and its mechanism uncertain.
Improved microbial stability was thought to result
from the metabolism of residual nutrients left after alcoholic fermentation. It removed the more readily metabolized malic and citric acids, leaving the more microbially
stable tartaric and lactic acids. In addition, the complex
nutrient demands of lactic acid bacteria were thought to
reduce the concentration of amino acids, nitrogen bases,
and vitamins. Although their levels do tend to decrease,
wines that have completed malolactic fermentation
may still support the growth of Oenococcus oeni or lactobacilli and pediococci (Costello et al., 1983) as well as
other spoilage microorganisms.
Contrary to common belief, malolactic fermentation
can occasionally decrease microbial stability. This can
occur when the wine is marginally too high in pH. The
resulting increase in pH can favor the subsequent
growth of spoilage lactic acid bacteria. Spoilage organisms generally do not grow in wines at a pH below
3.5, but their ability to grow increases rapidly as the
pH rises from 3.5 to 4.0 and above.
The stabilizing effect associated with malolactic
fermentation may arise more indirectly, from the preservation practices applied after its completion. The onset
and completion of malolactic fermentation permits the
application of procedures, such as the addition of sulfur
dioxide, storage at cool temperatures, and clarification,
that are definitively preservative. Delayed onset,
without the application of standard preservation techniques, exposes the wine to potential infection by acetic
acid bacteria, spoilage lactic acid bacteria, and spoilage
yeasts (notably Brettanomyces/Dekkera spp.). In the case
of Brettanomyces, however, there is evidence that malolactic fermentation also reduces the presence of ethyl
phenols, their principal spoilage by-product (Gerbaux
et al., 2009). In addition, the early completion of

540

7. Fermentation

malolactic fermentation reduces its possible, and inappropriate (sediment generating) occurrence in bottled
wine.
Flavor modification
The greatest controversy concerning the relative
merits or demerits of malolactic fermentation relates to
flavor modification. The diversity of opinion probably
reflects both the biologic and physicochemical conditions which exist during malolactic fermentation. For
example, malolactic fermentation in barrels may
enhance attributes characteristic of oak maturation, but
diminish the wine’s varietal distinctiveness (Fig. 7.51).
Varietal attributes, such as the apple and grapefruitorange essences often detected in Chardonnay and the
strawberry-raspberry attributes of Pinot noir wines,
may be replaced by hazelnut, fresh bread, and dried
fruit aromas, and animal and vegetable notes, respectively (Sauvageot and Vivier, 1997). In contrast, malolactic fermentation has been associated with increases
in the fruity aspects of Cabernet Sauvignon wines
(Bartowsky et al., 2011). Long-term studies on these sensory influences are needed.
Considerable variation in effects also depends on the
strain and species involved (Malherbe et al., 2013).

Vegetal

Buttered

50
45
40
35
30
25
20

Grapefruit

15
10
5
0

Roasted

Vanilla

Passion
fruit

Smoked

Spiced
Wine in new barrel (before MLF)
One-year-old barrel (before MLF)
Wine in stainless-steel tank (before MLF)
Wine in stainless-steel tank after MLF (SBX)
One-year-old barrel after MLF (SBX)
Wine in new barrel after MLF (SBX)
Wine in new barrel after MLF (SBY)

FIGURE 7.51 Presentation of eight descriptors (average of the note
of 11 tasters) made it possible to differentiate wines before and after
malolactic fermentation (MLF) in different tanks (stainless steel or oak
barrels) with two starter-culture preparations (SBX, SBY). From de
Revel, G., Martin, N., Pripis-Nicolau, L., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Bertrand, A.,
1999. Contribution to the knowledge of malolactic fermentation influence on
wine aroma. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47, 4003e4008. Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society, reproduced by permission.

Although potentially undesirable, strain selection does
permit winemakers to modify the sensory characteristics of their wines. These influences, however, are
affected by the wine’s temperature, pH, and varietal
origin. Thus, it is not surprising that the relative sensory
merits of malolactic fermentation are often contested.
Table 7.5 lists some of the substrates metabolized and
by-products produced by lactic acid bacteria. Fig. 7.52 illustrates not only the influence of different bacterial
strains, but also the response variability of two sets of
panelists.
Prominent among the many malolactic by-products is
diacetyl. At a concentration between 1 and 4 mg/L,
diacetyl may contribute positively to a wine’s fragrance
(the threshold varying with the type of wine). It is often
referred to as having a buttery, nutty, or toasty character.
However, at concentrations above 5e7 mg/L, its buttery
character can become pronounced and undesirable.
Mild aeration during malolactic fermentation dramatically increases diacetyl synthesis. Maximum accumulation correlates with the completion of malic and citric
acid metabolism (Nielsen and Richelieu, 1999). Surprisingly, sensory differences among wines, with and
without malolactic fermentation, often do not correlate
with their diacetyl content (Martineau and HenickKling, 1995). In addition, presence of a buttery aspect
does not necessarily correlate well with diacetyl contents (Bartowsky et al., 2002). Thus, even with a single
compound, the sensory influence of malolactic fermentation is complex.
Other flavorants occasionally synthesized in
amounts sufficient to affect a wine’s sensory character
include acetaldehyde, acetic acid, acetoin, 2-butanol,
diethyl succinate, ethyl acetate, ethyl lactate, and 1hexanol. Much of the acetic acid associated with malolactic fermentation appears to be derived from citric
acid metabolism. If the strain is a significant producer
of acetic acid, it can leave the wine unacceptably high
in volatile acidity.
Most lactic acid bacteria produce esterases. Although
this could result in important losses in the fruity character of young wines, such decreases generally are negligible. Their enzymes work poorly at wine pH values
(Matthews et al., 2007). Conversely, nonenzymatic synthesis of esters tends to increase during malolactic
fermentation, especially ethyl acetate. Ethyl acetate
may also accumulate via direct bacterial synthesis.
Many strains of lactic acid bacteria also produce b-glucosidases. If released in sufficient quantities, and not
inhibited by unfavorable temperature and ethanol conditions (Spano et al., 2005), these enzymes could hydrolyze odorless glycosidic complexes, enhancing the
development of a varietal character (D’Incecco et al.,
2004). Enzymic activities may also modify oak aromatics
(if malolactic fermentation occurs in wood cooperage)

Malolactic fermentation

TABLE 7.5 Substrates and fermentation products of lactic acid
bacteria.
Substrate

Products

Acids
L-Malate

L-Lactate,

CO2, succinate, acetate

Citrate; pyruvate

Lactate, acetate, CO2, acetoin,
diacetyl

Gluconate

Lactate, acetate, CO2

2-Oxoglutarate

4-Hydroxybutyrate, CO2,
succinate

Tartrate

Lactate, acetate, CO2, succinate

Sorbate

2,4-Hexadien-l-ol (sorbic alcohol)

Chlorogenate

Ethylcatechol, dehydroshikimate

Sugars
Glucose

Lactate, ethanol, acetate, CO2

Fructose

Lactate, ethanol, acetate, CO2,
mannitol

Arabinose, xylose, or ribose

Lactate, acetate

Polyols
Mannitol

(Probably from glucose)

2,3-Butanediol

2-Butanol

Glycerol

1,3-Propanediol

Amino acids
Arginine

Ornithine, CO2, NH4

Histidine

Histamine, CO2

Phenylalanine

2-Phenylethylamine, CO2

Tyrosine

Tyramine, CO2

Ornithine

Putrescine, CO2

Lysine

Cadaverine, CO2

Serine

Ethanolamine, CO2

Glutamine

Aminobutyrate, CO2

Unknown substrates (probably
sugars)

Propanol, isopropanol,
isobutanol, 2-methyl-1-butanol, 3methyl-1-butanol, ethyl acetate,
acetaldehyde, n-hexanol, noctanol, glycerol, 2,3-butanediol,
erythritol, arabitol, dextran,
diacetyl

After Radler, F., 1986. Microbial biochemistry. Experientia 42, 884e893, reproduced by
permission.

and change the wine’s soluble polysaccharide fraction
(Dols-Lafargue et al., 2007). Oenococcus oeni may also
contribute directly to the polysaccharide content of
wine (separate from the occasional undesirable

541

production of b-1,3-glucan chains (ropiness) (Ciezack
et al., 2010).
The metabolism of arginine, which has a bitter, musty
taste, could influence the taste perception of wines high
in residual arginine. Occasionally, residual arginine
values can reach the g/liter range. Incomplete arginine
metabolism can, however, liberate citrulline. Its reaction
with ethanol can produce the carcinogen, ethyl carbamate. Thankfully, this appears more likely with other
lactic acid bacteria than Oenococcus oeni (Mira de Orduña
et al., 2001) and tends to occur preferentially within a pH
range higher than that typical of wine.
Malolactic fermentation has traditionally been encouraged more in red wines than white wines. This preference
may relate to the tendency of lactic acid bacteria to metabolize compounds responsible for an excessively vegetative, grassy aspect, for example the herbaceous aspect
of Cabernet Franc wines (Gerland and Gerbaux, 1999).
O. oeni also appears to increase the presence of C4 to C8
fatty acid ethyl esters and 3-methylbutyl acetate (Ugliano
and Moio, 2005). In addition, red wines typically possess
more flavor than white wines. Thus, they are less likely to
be overpowered by malolactic flavors.
O. oeni can modify hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives
to vinylphenols, but is not known to decarboxylate them
to ethyl phenols. Regrettably, other lactic acid bacteria
can (Cavin et al., 1993). For example, Lactobacillus brevis,
L. plantarum, and Pediococcus spp. can convert ferulic
and p-coumaric acids to 4-ethylguaiacol and 4ethylphenol. The production of these compounds can
donate distinct phenolic or stable-like off-odors. At subthreshold levels, however, they may contribute to a
wine’s overall aromatic complexity. Because people
differ markedly in their detection thresholds, this may
help to explain why there is such diversity in opinion
relative to the flavor influences of malolactic
fermentation.
Also relating to phenolics, but in a clearly positive
vein, O. oeni has the potential to enhance the concentration of several aromatic compounds, notably oak
lactones, vanillins, and phenolic aldehydes. This is associated with in-barrel malolactic fermentation (de Revel
et al., 2005).
Malolactic fermentation occurring below pH 3.5
(typically by O. oeni) rarely generates undesirable offodors. Undesirable buttery, cheesy, or milky odors are
usually confined to malolactic fermentation induced
by pediococci or lactobacilli, at or above pH 3.5. Cold
soak and sluggish fermentation conditions may also
favor the production of malolactic off-odors.
Amine production
Lactic acid bacteria, notably the pediococci, produce
amines via amino acid decarboxylation. Nonetheless,
the prevalence of Oenococcus oeni suggests that it is the

542

7. Fermentation

(A)

(B)
6

4

Lo42

Lc74

Pc
spont.

Body (0–9)

5

Pc

Bitter Score (0–9)

Lo107
Lb110

MCW

spont.

MCW
Lc110
Lc74

4

Lo42

Lo107

3

Lo107
MCW

Lo107
Lc74

Lo42
2

Lc74
Lb110
Pc

Lb110

5

6

Lo42

MCW

Pc
3

1
3

4

5
Overall Quality (0–9)

(C)

2

6

3

4

7

Overall Score (0–9)

7
Lo42

Pc

6
Fruity (0–9)

Lc74
spont.
3

MCW
Lo107
Pc

4

MCW
Lc74
Lb110

Lo107

Lo42

3
2

3

4
5
Overall Quality (0–9)

6

7

FIGURE 7.52 Relationship of body (A), bitterness (B), and fruitiness (C) to overall quality of Cabernet Sauvignon wine fermented with various
malolactic cultures, as evaluated by two taste panels, composed of winemakers (C) and a wine research group (B). From Henick-Kling, T., Acree,
T., Gavitt, B.K., Kreiger, S.A., Laurent, M.H., 1993. Sensory aspects of malolactic fermentation. In: Stockley, C.S. (Ed.), Proc. 8th Aust. Wine Ind. Tech. Conf.
Winetitles, Adelaide, Australia, pp. 148e152, reproduced by permission.

primary source of histamine production in wine. Surprisingly, this can occur even when the bacteria are in
a dormant, unculturable state (Coton et al., 1998). The
potential for metabolic activity in unculturable microbes
suggests that aspects of their activity in wine may be unsuspected (Piao et al., 2015).
Thankfully, biogenic amine synthesis appears to be
significant only in wines of high pH. In addition, amine
production appears to be less with inoculated than
spontaneous malolactic fermentations (Smit and du
Toit, 2013). Although some biogenic amines can induce
blood-vessel constriction, headaches, and other associated effects, their contents in wine have not been demonstrated to be adequate to induce these physiological
effects in humans (Radler and Fäth, 1991).

Origin and growth of lactic acid bacteria
The ancestral habitat of Oenococcus oeni is unknown.
Although rarely isolated from grapevines (Bae et al.,
2006), the bacterium has no known habitat other than
wine. Its isolation from winery walls and equipment
probably relates to dispersion with wine residues. From
the relatively small variation in its genetic makeup,
O. oeni appears to have evolved from a few individuals
that have specialized to grow in wine (Zavaleta et al.,
1997). These appear to have subsequently spread
worldwide.
The only other member of the genus is O. kitaharae. Its
endemic habitat appears to be compost. Although closely
related to O. oeni, it does not produce the malolactic

543

Malolactic fermentation

Must Alcoholic
fermentation

Malolactic
fermentation

Conservation

8
Log cell number/ml

enzyme, prefers growth at higher pH values, and expresses other distinctive physiologic attributes.
As noted, grape surfaces rarely possess colonies of
O. oeni, nor are they a typical habitat for other lactic
acid bacteria. Nonetheless, species of Pediococcus, Lactobacillus, and Leuconostoc may occur in the range of
103e104 cells/mL shortly after crushing (Costello et al.,
1983). The population size depends largely on the maturity and health of the fruitdhigher numbers occurring
on mature, wounded, or infected fruit.
Although malolactic fermentation could originate
from bacteria derived from grape surfaces, spontaneous
fermentations usually appear to arise from winery
equipment. Stemmers, crushers, presses, and fermentors
may harbor populations of lactic acid bacteria. The relative importance of grape versus winery sources in spontaneous malolactic fermentation has yet to be clearly
established.
The current trend is for winemakers to inoculate their
wines with commercial strains when malolactic fermentation is desired. Of particular concern is avoiding slow,
delayed, or partial fermentation, the production of
off-flavors and high histamine levels, and the partial
metabolism of arginine to citrulline. Citrulline and its
breakdown product, carbamoyl-P, can generate ethyl
carbamate (a suspected carcinogen).
Unlike yeast growth during alcoholic fermentation,
no consistent bacterial growth sequence develops in
the must or wine during malolactic fermentation. A
pattern occasionally found in spontaneous malolactic
fermentations is shown in Fig. 7.53. Significant variations occur due to factors such as pH, total acidity, malic
acid content, temperature, duration of skin contact, and
grape cultivar (wine matrix).
Several strains of Oenococcus oeni may be present at
the beginning of alcoholic fermentation. In spontaneous
malolactic fermentations, the most common strains
frequently disappear by the end of alcoholic fermentation. Malolactic fermentation is usually conducted by
one or more of the strains that are initially uncommon
(Reguant and Bordons, 2003). When malolactic fermentation is induced by inoculation, it is typical for the inoculated strain to dominate deacidification or, at least, be a
common member of the population inducing malolactic
fermentation (Bartowsky et al., 2003).
In most spontaneous fermentations, preexisting bacteria rapidly lyse as alcoholic fermentation commences.
This reduces the bacterial population from about 1  103
to about 1 cell/mL. Most species of lactic acid bacteria
initially found die out during alcoholic fermentation.
Wines with pH values higher than 3.5 may show the
temporary
growth
of
species
such
as
Lactobacillus plantarum. Although capable of producing
ethyl phenols, the species may reduce oxidative browning by delaying the formation of xanthylium pigments

6
4
2
0

0

5

10
20
50
Days after crushing

80

FIGURE 7.53 Diagram of the growth of indigenous lactic acid
bacteria during the vinification of a red wine. Population development
of Oenococcus oeni below (solid line) and above (dot-dashed line) pH 3.5,
before and during malolactic fermentation. Near the end of fermentation and during maturation, the growth of other species of lactic acid
bacteria (dashed line may result in an accelerated decline in the O. oeni
population (dot-dashed line). From Wibowo, D., Eschenbruch, R., Davis,
C.R., Fleet, G.H., Lee, T.H., 1985. Occurrence and growth of lactic acid
bacteria in wine: a review. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 36, 302e313, reproduced by
permission.

from flavan-3-ols (Cureil et al., 2010). Occasionally,
when sulfiting is low and the pH is above 3.5,
Oenococcus oeni may induce malolactic fermentation
coincident with alcoholic fermentation.
The usual initial population decline has been variously
ascribed to sulfur dioxide toxicity, acidity, the synthesis of
ethanol and toxic carboxylic acids, or the increasingly
nutrient-poor status of fermenting must or wine. All these
factors may be involved to some degree. At the end of alcoholic fermentation, a lag period generally ensues before the
bacterial population begins to rise. This phase may be of
short duration or may last several months. Once growth
initiates, the bacterial population may rise to 106e108
cells/mL. In most wines of low pH, only O. oeni grows.
However, there can be variations in the proportion of
different O. oeni strains throughout malolactic fermentation. At high pH values, species of both Lactobacillus,
and especially Pediococcus, may predominate. Depending
on the strain or species involved, malic acid decarboxylation may occur simultaneously with bacterial multiplication or only after cell multiplication has ceased.
At the end of the exponential growth phase, the bacterial population enters a prolonged decline phase. The
slope of the decline can be dramatically changed by cellar practices. For example, storage at above 20e25 C or
the addition of sulfur dioxide can result in a rapid dying
off of O. oeni. If the pH is above 3.5, and other conditions
are favorable, previously inactive strains of Lactobacillus
and Pediococcus may begin to multiply. Their growth
often produces a corresponding decline in the population of O. oeni. The nature of this apparently competitive
antibiosis is unknown.

544

7. Fermentation

Growth conditions in wine are harsh for any
bacteriumdcool, acidic, alcoholic, anaerobic, nutrient
poor, and possessing toxic fatty acids. Thus,
Oenococcus oeni is exposed to multiple stresses. Its relative tolerance to these factors appears to be under the
control of a master regulator (CtsR) (Grandvalet et al.,
2005). It controls the synthesis of a variety of stress
response proteins, such as HSPs and Clp ATPdependent proteases. The first group facilitates maintenance of proper protein folding, while the second
degrades improperly folded proteins. In addition, the
bacterium produces membrane-bound ATPases,
thought to maintain cytoplasmic electrolytic balance.
Many of these proteins are synthesized at specific
phases in colony growth. The influence of these stress
factors on bacterial growth and physiology are outlined
below.

Malolactic fermentation rate (weeks–1)

Factors affecting malolactic fermentation

0.4

0.2

0

3.2

3.5

3.8
pH

Physicochemical factors
pH
The initial pH of juice and wine strongly influences
not only if and when malolactic fermentation occurs,
but also how and what species will conduct the process
(Fig. 7.54). Low pH not only slows the rate, but also delays its initiation. Below a pH of 3.5, Oenococcus oeni is
the predominant species inducing malolactic fermentation, whereas above pH 3.5 Pediococcus and Lactobacillus
spp. become increasingly prevalent (Costello et al.,
1983). Some of the inhibitory effects observed at low
pH are probably indirect, acting through increased
cell-membrane sensitivity to ethanol and the enhanced
proportion of molecular sulfur dioxide. The pH also
significantly affects the composition and degree of cellmembrane fatty acid unsaturation, similar to ethanol
(Drici-Cachon et al., 1996).
Through these indirect influences, the pH modifies
the metabolic activity of lactic acid bacteria. For
example, sugar fermentation is much more effective
at higher values. Similarly, the synthesis of acetic acid
increases, whereas diacetyl production decreases in
relation to increased pH (see Wibowo et al., 1985).
The metabolism of malic and tartaric acid is also
affected, with decarboxylation of malic acid being
favored at low pH values, whereas the potential for tartaric acid degradation increases above pH 3.5. This results primarily from the preferential growth of
Lactobacillus brevis and L. plantarum at higher pH values
(Radler and Yannissis, 1972). This can lead to dramatic
increases in wine pH, if both malic and tartaric acids
(strong acids) are metabolized to lactic acid (a weak
acid).

FIGURE 7.54 Connection between initial pH and the rate of
malolactic fermentation. From Bousbouras, G.E., Kunkee, R.E., 1971.
Effect of pH on malo-lactic fermentation in wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 22,
121e126, reproduced by permission.

Temperature
The pronounced effect of temperature on malolactic
fermentation has long been realized dthe process often
occurring when cellars began to warm in the spring. To
speed its initiation, cellars may be heated to maintain the
wine’s temperature above 20 C. Although temperature
directly affects bacterial growth rate, it most significantly influences the rate of malic acid decarboxylation.
Maximal decarboxylation occurs at between 20 and
25 C, whereas growth is roughly similar within a range
of 20e35 C (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 1975). Outside this
range, decarboxylation slows dramatically. At temperatures below 10 C, decarboxylation essentially ceases. In
addition, most strains of Oenococcus oeni grow very
slowly or not at all below 15 C. They do maintain cell
viability, though. Thus, wines cooled after malolactic
fermentation commonly retain a high viable population
for months. Temperatures around 25 C favor a rapid
decline in the O. oeni population (Lafon-Lafourcade
et al., 1983), but can encourage the growth of pediococci
and lactobacilli.
Cellar practices
Many cellar practices can affect when, and if, spontaneous malolactic fermentation occurs. Maceration
commonly increases the likelihood and early onset of
malolactic fermentation (Guilloux-Benatier et al., 1989).

Malolactic fermentation

The precise factors involved are unknown, but they may
entail the action of phenols as electron acceptors in the
oxidation of sugars (Whiting, 1975). This would help
to explain why malolactic fermentation has occurred
more commonly in red wines than white wines. The
higher pH of most red wines is undoubtedly involved
as well.
Clarification can directly reduce the population of lactic acid bacteria by favoring their removal, along with
yeasts and grape solids. Racking, fining, centrifugation,
and other similar practices also remove nutrients or limit
their uptake into wine as a consequence of yeast
autolysis.
Chemical factors
Carbohydrates and polyols
The chemical composition of must and wine has a
profound influence on the outcome of malolactic
fermentation. Carbohydrates and polyols constitute the
most significant group of fermentable compounds
(Davis et al., 1986a). Most dry wines contain between 1
and 3 g/L residual hexoses and pentoses. There are
also variable amounts of di- and trisaccharides, sugar alcohols, glycosides, glycerol, and other polyols.
There is considerable heterogeneity among strains
and species in their use of these nutrients. Ethanol and
pH also influence their ability to ferment carbohydrates.
Consequently, few generalizations about carbohydrate
use appear possible. The major exception may be the
poor use of most polyols. Few lactobacilli metabolize
glycerol, the most prevalent polyol in wine. Although
uncommon, glycerol metabolism can produce a bittertasting compound, acrolein (Meyrath and Lüthi, 1969).
Skin contact, before or during fermentation, promotes
bacterial growth and malolactic fermentation. This is
associated with an increased release of mannoproteins
during fermentation, and reduced production of toxic
mid-chain fatty (carboxylic) acids. A similar boost is
also associated with sur lies maturation. Regrettably, it
increases the likelihood of higher biogenic amine production (Smit and du Toit, 2013). Must clarification
before fermentation appears to enhance the subsequent
release of yeast polysaccharides, but also reduces the
natural population of lactic acid bacteria (an important
factor if early spontaneous malolactic fermentation is
desired). Synthesis of a- and b-glucosidases by lactic
acid bacteria increases in the presence of yeast polysaccharides, suggesting that polysaccharide hydrolysis
may be a carbon source for cell growth (GuillouxBenatier et al., 1993).
Occasionally, increases in the concentration of glucose
and fructose have been noted following malolactic
fermentation. These increases appear to be coincidental.
The sugars may arise from the nonenzymatic

545

breakdown of various complex sugars, such as trehalose, by release from glycosides or from the liberation
of sugars following the pyrolytic hydrolysis of oak
hemicelluloses.
Organic acids
Although the decarboxylation of malic acid is the
principal reason for promoting malolactic fermentation, other acids are also metabolized. Of particular
importance is the oxidation of citric acid. It is associated with the synthesis of acetic acid and diacetyl (Shimazu et al., 1985). Few bacteria in wine, other than
O. oeni, appear to metabolize citric acid. Where the flavor of diacetyl is undesired, a commercial strain of
O. oeni (CiNi) is available that does not metabolize citrate. Gluconic acid, characteristically found in botrytized wines, is also metabolized by lactic acid
bacteria (excepting the pediococci). Some lactic acid
bacteria, notably the lactobacilli, have been reported
to degrade tartaric acid (Radler and Yannissis, 1972).
This has been associated with a wine fault called
tourne.
The relative significance of organic acid metabolism
to the energy budget of lactic acid bacteria is unclear.
Both malic and citric acids are fermented after the major
growth phase, when bacteria enter the stationary phase.
The decarboxylation of malic acid, and the subsequent
release of lactic acid from the cell, activates Hþ uptake
via membrane-bound ATPase. This is associated with
the generation of ATP. A small proportion of malic
acid is also metabolized directly to lactic acid. This
may generate reducing power (NADH).
Fumaric acid addition was once proposed as an inhibitor of malolactic fermentation. However, its activity decreases dramatically at pH values above 3.5 (Pilone
et al., 1974). Thus, it becomes progressively ineffective
under the precise conditions where protection becomes
increasingly needed.
The rise in pH associated with malic acid decarboxylation was particularly a problem when sorbic acid was
added to control spoilage yeasts in sweet wines. Metabolism of sorbic acid by lactic acid bacteria resulted in
the formation of 2-ethoxyhexa-3,4- diene, a compound
possessing a strong geranium-like off-odor.
The ability of lactic acid bacteria to metabolize or
tolerate fatty acids is largely unknown. However, some
fatty acids are toxic to lactic acid bacteria, notably octanoic, decanoic, and dodecanoic acids produced by
yeasts. These are more inhibitory in their acidic forms,
but more cytotoxic in their esterified forms (GuillouxBenatier et al., 1998). Tolerance to their toxicity is one
of the multiple features for which current strain selection and/or breeding is being conducted. Adsorption
of these acids onto added yeast hulls helps diminish
their toxicity.

546

7. Fermentation

Lactic acid bacteria are noted for their complex nitrogen growth requirements. Nonetheless, few generalizations about the nitrogen composition of wines appear
evident (Remize et al., 2006). For example, the concentration of individual amino acids may increase,
decrease, or remain stable during malolactic fermentation. Simple interpretation of the data is confounded
by the release of bacterial proteases. These hydrolyze
soluble proteins into smaller peptides and amino acids.
Of these, transporting peptides is more energy-efficient
than the uptake of individual amino acids. The latter
have higher energy requirements. Besides grapes, an
additional important source of nitrogenous compounds
is yeast autolysis.
Of amino acids, only the concentration of arginine appears to change consistently during malolactic fermentation. This involves its bioconversion to ornithine. The
conversion is associated with the generation of ATP.
Arginine uptake, along with fructose, also activates
stress-responsive genes that enhance survival (Bourdineaud, 2006).
Where reduction in amino acid content is evident, it is
probably associated with their uptake and incorporation
into proteins. The direct uptake and utilization of
ammonia apparently does not occur.
Ethanol
At low concentrations (1.5%), ethanol appears to
favor bacterial growth (King and Beelman, 1986). At
higher concentrations, it progressively retards growth,
and even more effectively inhibits malolactic fermentation (Fig. 7.55). Of lactic acid bacteria, Lactobacillus is
the most ethanol-tolerant. For example, L. trichodes can
grow in wines at up to 20% ethanol (Vaughn, 1955). A
few strains of Oenococcus oeni grow in culture media at
up to 15% alcohol (Guzzon et al., 2009). This trait is
becoming more important as the production of table
wines with high alcohol contents increases. Modified
inoculation procedures appear also to have some benefit
in acclimating O. oeni to higher alcohol levels (Zapparoli
et al., 2009). Alcohol tolerance appears to decline, both
with increasing temperature and decreasing pH values.
The source of ethanol’s inhibitory action is unknown,
but likely involves changes in the semifluid nature of the
plasma membrane and protein aggregation. These
changes can induce enhanced passive Hþ ion influx
and loss of cellular constituents (Da Silveira et al.,
2003). A small HSP (Lo18) helps limit both effects (Maitre et al., 2014). A reduction in the concentration of
neutral lipids and an increase in the proportion of glycolipids have been correlated with high alcohol concentrations (Desens and Lonvaud-Funel, 1988). Ethanol
tolerance has also been associated with augmented

Malic acid (g/liter)

Nitrogen-containing compounds

4

0.8

2

0.4

0

0
0

4

8

12
Days

16

FIGURE 7.55 Influence of ethanol on the growth and malolactic
activity of Oenococcus oeni malic acid (g/L), ————; bacterial growth
(OD620 nm), - - -; ,, 0%; -, 5%; B, 8%; 7, 11%; ;, 13% ethanol. From
Guilloux-Benatier, M., 1987. Les souches de bactéries lactiques et les divers
essais d’ensemencement de la fermentation malolactique en France. Bull.
O.I.V. 60, 624e642, reproduced by permission.

synthesis of certain phospholipids (phosphoethanolamine and sphingomyelin), and the incorporation of lactobacillic acid in the plasmalemma (Teixeira et al., 2002).
Alcohol-induced membrane malfunction probably
explains the growth disruption, reduced viability, and
poor malolactic fermentation at high alcohol contents.
Up to an 80% reduction in the rate of malic acid decarboxylation has been reported with an increase in alcohol
content from 11% to 13% (Lafon-Lafourcade, 1975).
Other organic compounds
During malolactic fermentation, lactic acid bacteria
assimilate a wide range of compounds. Occasionally,
this can affect the progress of malolactic fermentation.
The most well-known example involves the metabolism
of carbonyl sulfonates. This has the potential to liberate
sufficient SO2 to slow or terminate malolactic
fermentation.
Many lactic acid bacteria produce esterases. Despite
this, the concentration of most esters, such as 2phenethyl acetate and ethyl hexanoate, changes little
during malolactic fermentation. Any reductions that
occur appear to be insufficient to cause sensory impact.
Other esters, such as ethyl acetate, ethyl lactate, and
diethyl succinate, may increase. Although the last
two are unlikely to have a sensory impact, due to their
low volatility, increased ethyl acetate content could
donate an off-odor, resembling nail-polish remover
(acetone).
Various phenolic acids, such as ferulic, quinic, and
shikimic acids as well as their esters are metabolized
by some lactic acid bacteria. Lactobacillus spp. are notable
in this regard. One of the dubious consequences can be

547

Malolactic fermentation

Fermentors
Spontaneous malolactic fermentation often occurs in
the same fermentor as alcoholic fermentation, before
racking and maturation. Formerly, malolactic fermentation occurred in oak barrels after transfer from the
fermentation tank. This is correlated with increased
anthocyaninetannin polymerization (favoring color stability and intensity) (Vivas et al., 1995). In addition,
astringency is reduced, generating a smoother, richer
wine, and oak and fruit flavors that are viewed as being
more harmonious and balanced. In other studies,
though, red wines lose color intensity, associated with
reduced polymerization and diminished acetaldehyde
and pyruvic acid concentrations (Burns and Osborne,
2015). Lactic acid bacteria may also facilitate the release
of flavorants (e.g., vanillin from oak) by hydrolyzing
glycoside precursors (Bloem et al., 2008; GonzálezCenteno et al., 2017). In addition, whether malolactic
fermentation occurs in barrel or stainless steel appears
to affect the wine’s sensory characteristics (Izquierdo
et al., 2004).
Gases
Sulfur dioxide can markedly inhibit malolactic
fermentation. The effect is complex, due to the differing
concentrations and toxicities of wine’s many sulfur dioxide states. As usual, free forms are more inhibitory than
bound forms (Fig. 7.56). Of free forms, molecular SO2 is
inherently the most antimicrobial. Wine pH significantly
influences the toxicity of sulfur dioxide by affecting the
relative proportions of these forms, as does the concentrations of various wine constituents to which sulfur
dioxide can bond. Temperature also dramatically

5

Control
4

Bacteria (millions/mL)

the generation of volatile phenolics, such as ethylguaiacol and ethylphenol. Even at low concentrations, these
compounds have spicy, medicinal, creosote-like odors
(Whiting, 1975). Because these fragrances do not characterize malolactic fermentations, their synthesis is probably too minimal to be perceptible.
At the concentrations generally found in wine, grape
phenolics do not seriously retard malolactic fermentation, even though they have the potential to inhibit
growth (Campos et al., 2009). In contrast, anthocyanins
and gallic acid appear to favor bacterial viability (Vivas
et al., 1997). Nevertheless, leaving stems in the ferment
can delay the onset and somewhat slow the rate of malolactic fermentation (Feuillat et al., 1985). The same can
occur associated with prolonged maturation in oak
cooperage, with ellagitannins suppressing cell viability
slightly (Vivas et al., 1995). In this regard, how the oak
is treated during barrel assembly appears to be of particular significance. For example, growth of Oenococcus oeni
was favored when the wood was toasted, but retarded
without firing (de Revel et al., 2005).

3

2

10 mg/L
1

30 mg/L
8
30 mg/L

15

22
Days

29

10 mg/L

35

FIGURE 7.56 Action of two levels (10 and 30 mg/L) of free SO2
and acetaldehyde-bisulfite on the growth of Oenococcus oeni. Control,
. . ..; acetaldehyde bisulfite, ————————; free SO2, - - - - -.
From Lafon-Lafourcade, S., 1975. Factors of the Malolactic Fermentation of
Wines. In: Carr, J.G. (Ed.), Lactic Acid Bacteria in Food and Beverages
Academic Press, London, pp. 43e53, reproduced by permission.

influences bacterial sensitivity (Lafon-Lafourcade,
1981), as does the concentration of other toxicants (e.g.,
ethanol and some fatty acids). In all cases, the effect is
more bacteriostatic than bactericidal (Delfini and Morsiani, 1992), and partially due to disruption of ATPase
activity (Carreté et al., 2002).
Different species and strains vary considerably in
their sensitivity to sulfur dioxide. In general, strains of
Oenococcus oeni are particularly sensitive. Because of
the greater tolerance of pediococci and lactobacilli to
SO2, they may be unintentionally selected by sulfur dioxide addition, especially in high pH wines. Thus,
where sulfur dioxide is added prior to malolactic
fermentation, it is judicious to inoculate the must or
wine with a known sulfur dioxide-resistant strain of
O. oeni. This is of particular concern with white wines,
where less sulfur dioxide tends to become bound in
inactive forms.
Although lactic acid bacteria are strictly fermentative,
small amounts of oxygen can favor malolactic fermentation. As the bacteria neither respire nor require sterols or
unsaturated fatty acids for growth, oxygen may act
by improving the redox balance via reaction with
flavoproteins.

548

7. Fermentation

The influence of carbon dioxide on malolactic fermentation is somewhat controversial. One potential mechanism for involvement may be the enhanced production
of oxaloacetate, via the carboxylation of pyruvate. This
could both help maintain a desirable redox balance
and favor amino acid biosynthesis.
Pesticides
Little is known about the possible effects of pesticide
residues on the action of lactic acid bacteria. Vinclozolin
and iprodione have been reported to suppress malolactic fermentation, but enhance the growth of acetic
acid bacteria (San Romáo and Coste Belchior, 1982).
Cymoxanil (Curzate) and dichlofluanid (Euparen)
have also been reported to inhibit malolactic fermentation (Haag et al., 1988). Copper equally has an inhibitory
effect, with the delay in malolactic fermentation being
accentuated at higher ethanol and sulfur dioxide concentrations, and lower pH values (Vidal et al., 2001). In
contrast, benalaxyl, carbendazim, and triadimefon
were found to have no effect on lactic acid bacteria
(Cabras et al., 1994). Of seven fungicides and three insecticides tested by Ruediger et al. (2005), only the insecticide dicofol was found to have an inhibitory effect on
malolactic fermentation.
Biological factors
Biological interactions in malolactic fermentation are
as intricate as the interplay of physical and chemical factors already noted. Although mutually beneficial effects
may occur, most interactions appear to be negative.
Yeast interactions
Occasionally, alcoholic and malolactic fermentation
occur simultaneously. In this instance, lactic acid bacteria occasionally exert an inhibitory effect on yeast
growth, causing stuck fermentations. More commonly,
though, yeasts inhibit bacterial growth (Edwards et al.,
1990). Cryotolerant yeasts, which are more commonly
used with white wines, appear to be more inhibitory
than other strains (Caridi and Corte, 1997). There is
also marked differences in sensitivity among O. oeni
strains. Laboratory tests (Costello et al., 2003; Arnink
and Henick-Kling, 2005) may help winemakers determine whether, and to what degree, particular yeast
and bacterial strain combinations are compatible. This
could avoid the often-prolonged delay between the
completion of alcoholic fermentation and the onset of
malolactic fermentation. Nonetheless, cessation of bacterial growth does not necessarily inhibit malolactic
fermentation (if the population is already at the point
were malolactic fermentation is possible). Spoilage
yeasts, such as Pichia, Candida, and Saccharomycodes,
can also retard, if not inhibit, malolactic fermentation.

Various explanations have been offered for the inhibitory
action
of
yeasts.
Suppression
by
Saccharomyces bayanus (Nygaard and Prahl, 1996) has
been associated with its production of SO2 (Larsen et al.,
2003), and the high alcohol tolerance of this yeast species
(resulting in a slow loss in its viability, the onset of autolysis, and associated release of nutrients). The depletion of
arginine and other amino acids during the early phases
of alcoholic fermentation is another possibility. Certain
yeast strains coprecipitate with bacteria, removing them
from the wine and thus delaying malolactic fermentation.
The increasing ethanol content and the accumulation of
toxic carboxylic acids (notably octanoic and decanoic
acid) are also likely involved (Lafon-Lafourcade et al.,
1984). Furthermore, proteins with antibacterial activities
(e.g., lysozyme) have been isolated from some strains of
S. cerevisiae (Dick et al., 1992). Whether this is related to
the selectively toxic, proteinaceous agent identified by
Comitini et al. (2005) is unknown. Osborne and Edwards
(2007) have also isolated a peptide from S. cerevisiae that inhibits malolactic fermentation.
After alcoholic fermentation, yeast cells die and
begin to undergo autolysis. The associated release of
nutrients may explain the initiation (or reinitiation) of
bacterial growth after the completion of alcoholic
fermentation. Thus, leaving wines in contact with the
lees for several weeks tends to encourage malolactic
fermentation. Although nutrient release is undoubtedly involved, the maintenance of a high dissolved
CO2 concentration in the lees (Mayer, 1974), and the
release of mannoproteins (Guilloux-Benatier et al.,
1995) also appear to be involved (Fig. 7.57). Mannoproteins not only inactivate toxic fatty acids, but also provide nutrients when decomposed by bacterial
b-glucosidases and proteases.
Surprisingly, malolactic fermentation may be stimulated in botrytized juice (San Romáo et al., 1985). This occurs in spite of the well-known reduction in available
nitrogen content. Growth promotion may result from
the metabolism of acetic acid (found in higher concentrations in botrytized grapes) or the removal of toxic carboxylic acids (adsorbed by Botrytis-synthesized
polysaccharides). Regrettably, the increased glycerol
content can favor the development of mannitic fermentation, if acidity is too low.
Bacterial interactions
The activity of acetic acid bacteria often favors malolactic fermentation during alcoholic fermentation. This
may result indirectly from their suppression of yeast
growth (resulting in higher nutrient levels and lower
concentrations of alcohol and toxic carboxylic acids) or
directly by growth enhancement through the use of acetic acid as a nutrient.

Malolactic fermentation

OD 620 nm
0.18
0.16

1.0 g/L

0.14

549
FIGURE 7.57 Influence of yeast mannoproteins on
the growth of Oenococcus oeni. From Charpentier, C.,
2000. Yeast autolysis and yeast macromolecules? Their
contribution to wine flavor and stability IProc. ASEV 50th
Anniversary Annual Meeting, Seattle, Washington June 19
e23, 2000. American Society for Enology and Viticulture,
Davis, CA, pp. 271e277, reproduced by permission.

0.5 g/L

0.12
0.1 g/L

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04

Control

0.02
0
0

5.2

10

14

18.6

23.4

31

38

Time (days)

Internal
competition/antibiosis
between
Oenococcus oeni strains is suggested by changes in the
relative proportions of different strains throughout
malolactic fermentation. More importantly, there may
be antagonism between different species of lactic acid
bacteria. Such antagonism is rare below pH 3.5, at which
typically only O. oeni grows. However, above pH 3.5,
pediococci and lactobacilli progressively have a selective advantage over O. oeni. Antagonism seems clearest
when a decline of O. oeni is mirrored by an equivalent
rise in the number of lactobacilli and pediococci. The
mechanism(s) of this apparent antagonism are
unknown.
Viral interactions
Bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) can severely
disrupt
malolactic
fermentation
by
attacking
Oenococcus oeni. Virally infected O. oeni may also exist
in an inactive (prophage) state (Cavin et al., 1991).
Because the prophage state is more unstable at higher
pH values, the lytic phase may reestablish itself as the
pH rises during malolactic fermentation. Under such
conditions, malolactic fermentation may continue, but
less predictably, under the action of Lactobacillus and/
or Pediococcus.
O. oeni is most sensitive to phage infection during its
exponential growth phase. The virus attaches to the bacterium and injects its DNA into the cell (Fig. 7.58). In the

cytoplasm, viral DNA begins to replicate and establish
control over bacterial functions. After multiple copies
of both the viral DNA and its protein coat have been produced, these components self-assemble into virus particles. At this point, the bacterium bursts open (lyses),
releasing the virus particles. These may subsequently
initiate additional infection/lytic cycles.
The main defense against viral disruption involves
massive inoculation with Oenococcus. A large population
reduces the number of cell divisions and thereby the
duration of bacterial infection-sensitivity. The use of a
mixed culture, containing several resistant strains, is
also protective. Mixed cultures minimize the likelihood
that all strains will be sensitive to any phage race present. Thus, infection may delay, but unlikely inhibit,
malolactic fermentation. Besides delaying or inhibiting
malolactic fermentation, phage infection can leave the
wine open to the undesirable development of pediococci
and lactobacilli. Specificity among phage strains means
that those attacking O. oeni are unlikely to attack Pediococci or lactobacilli or vice versa.
Oenococcus oeni strains may possess one or more of at
least three types of plasmids (Prévost et al., 1995). The
significance of their presence is uncertain, but may favor
adaptation to vine conditions (Favier et al., 2011). Plasmids are also being investigated as vectors for the incorporation of properties in the breeding of new strains of
O. oeni. Traditional breeding is complicated by the

550

7. Fermentation

Attachment

Head
Tail
Infection
Base plate
Phage

Replication
Receptor
site
Cell wall

Lysis

Cytoplasm

Bacterium

FIGURE 7.58 Attachment and infection cycle of phage viruses on bacteria. From Henick-Kling, T., 1985. Phage can block malolactic. Wines Vines
69 (6), 55e59, reproduced by permission.

absence of a well-developed sexual reproductive system
in bacteria.

Control
Spontaneous malolactic fermentation has been notoriously difficult to manage. Malolactic fermentation
may take months to begin, even under conditions chosen to favor its development. It can also occur when least
desired. The following procedures are used to either
encourage or inhibit malolactic fermentation.
Inoculation
To encourage malolactic fermentation, winemakers
commonly inoculate with one or more strains of
Oenococcus oeni. Addition is concomitant with the development of conditions favorable to its activity: warm
temperatures (w18e22 C), minimal or no sulfiting,
and delayed racking. Their combination usually induces
the rapid onset and completion of malolactic fermentation. Without inoculation, it may take weeks or months
for the indigenous bacterial population to achieve a
size sufficient to initiate malic acid decarboxylation.
Inoculation often involves lyophilized or frozen concentrates. With most preparations, proper reactivation

is critical to maintaining malolactic ability (Hayman
and Monk, 1982). Reactivation commonly takes place
in nonsulfited, diluted, grape juice (1:1 with water),
adjusted to a pH of 3.6 or above. Additives, usually yeast
extract, may be added at a concentration of about 0.05%
w/v. Reactivation generally requires 24 h, after which
the organisms are cultured to achieve the desired population. Treating cells to various types of shock, for
example 42 C for 1 h, appears to increase resistance to
subsequent inoculation (Guzzo et al., 1994). This appears to involve the induction of several HSPs. However, with several preparations, the bacteria can be directly
added to wine without prior reactivation or
multiplication.
Once malolactic fermentation has occurred in one
batch of wine, it may be used to inoculate other batches.
However, this is generally not recommended, as it risks
unwittingly transferring unsuspected contaminants that
the same time. Details on how to restart stuck malolactic
fermentation are given in Krieger-Weber (2009).
Inoculation customarily aims to achieve a population
of about 106e107 viable cells/mL. This usually assures
the quick onset of malolactic fermentation and the dominance of the inoculated strain(s). However, laboratory
studies suggest that higher populations (108 cells/
mL) may be preferable under highly acidic conditions

Malolactic fermentation

(Maicas et al., 2000). At this population size, the cells
have reached a physiological state where malic acid
decarboxylation can occur without cell division. Once
malic acid decarboxylation commences, it usually takes
from 1 to 3 weeks to complete. High inoculation levels
also diminish the synthesis of secondary metabolites,
such as diacetyl and acetoin.
Although inoculation tends to be followed by the
rapid onset of malolactic fermentation, it is not assured.
Multiple factors could result in the inoculated strain
becoming inactive or being superseded by endemic
strains or species. Thus, the outcome of malolactic
fermentation is less predictable than equivalent inoculations with yeast strains in alcoholic fermentation.
Various mousy, bitter, acetic flavors may develop, and
viscous textures may result if spoilage lactobacilli or
pediococci come to dominate. Typically, though, these
undesirable consequences do not occur if the inoculated
strain initiates early malolactic fermentation and the
wine possesses an initial pH below 3.6.
Where initiation has frequently been unacceptably
slow, addition of a commercial activator 24 h before reinoculation may eliminate this problem. The activator
often contains a combination of bacterial nutrients and
components that absorb toxic fatty acids from the wine
(Gindreau and Dumeau, 2005).
When simultaneous alcoholic and malolactic fermentation is desired, the activation medium is inoculated
with both yeasts and bacteria. Occasionally, however,
this has been reported to result in the production of
high concentrations of acetic acid. To avoid this, Prahl
et al. (1988) suggest the use of Lactobacillus plantarum.
It is insensitive to low pH, rapidly decarboxylates malic
acid, does not generate acetic acid, and rapidly dies out
as the alcohol content rises. Nonetheless, the ability of
many strains of L. plantarum to produce volatile phenols
is a concern (Silva et al., 2011).
There is considerable variation in opinion as to when
to inoculate. The Bordeaux school recommends inoculation after the completion of alcoholic fermentation, to
avoid the risk of off-odor production (LafonLafourcade, 1980) and the potential for stuck fermentation. Delayed inoculation avoids much of the toxicity
of C8 and C10 carboxylic acids (their concentration declines after alcoholic fermentation), but exposes the cells
to the highest levels of ethanol.
Several researchers have not confirmed French findings linking the development of high concentrations of
acetic acid, yeast antagonism, or stuck fermentation
with earlier inoculation (Jussier et al., 2006). They recommend concurrent alcoholic and malolactic fermentations. This option avoids any shortage of nutrients,
exposure to toxic alcohol concentrations, and results in
shorter overall fermentation times (Abrahamse and
Bartowsky, 2012). This permits earlier racking, cooling,

551

and sulfiting of the wine. The sensory benefit of joint
malolactic and alcoholic fermentation may be the production of less buttery, more fruity winesdalbeit not
consistently (Antalick et al., 2013). This may result
from interactions between their metabolic by-products
(Rossouw et al., 2012).
An alternative method for achieving joint malolactic
and alcoholic fermentation involves the use of a yeast
strain transformed with the malolactic enzyme and a
malic acid transport protein (Husnik et al., 2007). It is a
means of achieving the desired deacidification without
any of the potential flavor changes associated with bacterial malolactic fermentation.
Another suggested method involves inoculation
midway through alcoholic fermentation. Theoretically,
this should avoid the toxicity of high concentrations of
ethanol and suppression by sulfur dioxide. Any sulfur
dioxide added during the grape crush is largely inactivated by binding to carbonyl and other compounds in
the juice. However, the most intense level of yeastinduced antagonism by its metabolites, such as decanoic
acid, may be encountered with this option.
Reasons for such a diversity of opinion remain unclear. Possible sources may involve differences in bacterial and yeast strains as well as grape nutrient status and
vinicultural procedures. Because of this uncertainty,
winemakers ideally should conduct their own trials to
establish what works best for them.
Periodically, interest has been shown in the application of industrial approaches to malolactic fermentation.
This has involved both the use of immobilized bacterial
cells and enzymes. Such techniques offer the possibility
of faster decarboxylation of malic acid, better control
over the degree of the conversion (especially useful in
wines with pH values above 3.5), and a reduction in
the production of undesirable flavor compounds. These
advantages also come with the disadvantages of cost
and complexity.
Immobilization involves coating a dense population
of active cells with a gel, such as pectinate, alginate,
carrageenan, or polyacrylamide (Genisheva et al.,
2013). Extrusion of the gelecell mixture forms small
beads, about 2e3 mm in diameter. The gel helps prevent
cell division and infiltration into the wine. In many industrial uses, division of the entrapped cells is unnecessary. This is equally valid with malolactic fermentation,
in which stationary phase cells actively decarboxylate
malic acid. A support system (reactor) holds the beads
in a rigid framework, through which the wine is slowly
passed. This can achieve rapid malic acid decarboxylation (Simó et al., 2017). Other benefits of encapsulation
include reduced bacterial sensitivity to pH, ethanol, and
sulfur dioxide (Kosseva and Kennedy, 2004). Recent improvements in the useful life of the reactor may improve
the procedure’s economics. An alternate approach uses

552

7. Fermentation

a cellulose sponge (given a basic charge), to which individual bacterial cells adhere (Maicas et al., 2001). This
avoids the development of inactive central regions,
potentially found in gelecell aggregates.
Immobilizing the malolactic enzyme into an inert
permeable medium would be simpler because it would
avoid the need for maintaining living cells. Enzyme
immobilization also would avoid any flavor modification
(if desired)donly malic acid decarboxylation would be
induced. However, a considerable obstacle to its successful application is the instability of the crucial enzyme
cofactor (NADþ) at low pH values. This problem has
been avoided by separating the enzyme reaction mixture
(at a favorable pH) from the wine. A central membrane divides the reactor into two chambers, one each for the wine
and enzymic solution (Formisyn et al., 1997).
Inhibition
Inhibition of malolactic fermentation involves the
reverse of factors that favor its occurrence. This usually
involves wine storage at or below 10 C, early and

frequent racking, early clarification (both before and/
or after alcoholic fermentation), acidification if the pH
is high, minimal maceration, avoidance of sur lies maturation, and maintenance of a total sulfur dioxide content
above 50 mg/L. Fig. 7.59 gives a representative example
of the sensitivity of Oenococcus oeni to sulfur dioxide.
Lysozyme (muramidase) is a natural antimicrobial
agent. It is particularly active against gram-negative bacteria, due to its ability to degrade the cell wall. It is present in many animal secretions (for example, tears), and
is part of the vertebrate innate immune system. Because
of its abundance in egg whites, it is the principal source
of commercial lysozyme. It has been approved in several
countries for the control of lactic acid bacteria. It has the
advantage of being more effective at higher pH values
(where it is most needed), and being primarily active
against dividing cells. However, it is less effective in
red wines than white wines (Azzolini et al., 2010), and
is inactive against several strains of spoilage lactic acid
bacteria (Delfini et al., 2004). Lysozyme appears to
have no detectable effect on wine aroma, taste

FIGURE 7.59 Survival of Oenococcus oeni, expressed in
terms of cellular survival, in the presence of 0.84 (-), 2.58 100%
(:) and 3.72 (C) mg/L of H2SO3. From Delfini, C., Morsiani, M.G., 1992. Resistance to sulfur dioxide of malolactic
strains of Leuconostoc oenos and Lactobacillus sp. isolated
90
from wines. Sci. Aliments 12, 493e511, reproduced by
permission.

80

70
65
60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1
2

1

2

2,5

3

22
Hours

553

Appendix 7.1

(Bartowsky et al., 2004a), or effervescence. If added, it
should not coincide with the addition of protein fining
agents. The latter remove the enzyme along with other
soluble proteins. Binding with tannins also limits lysozyme’s effectiveness in red wines (Bartowsky et al.,
2004a). In addition, it may complicate issues relative to
haze development in white wines. This is usually corrected when the wine is fined (Weber et al., 2009). Overuse has the disadvantage of increasing color loss.
Alternative agents are the bacteriocins, nisin, and
pediocin (Ruiz-Larrea et al., 2007). These are natural
antimicrobial peptides or proteins produced by bacteria.
They have the advantages of being colorless, odorless,
and food safe (Cleveland et al., 2001). Both appear to
show promise in preventing malolactic fermentation.
Procedures identical to those just noted may be
employed following malolactic fermentation to limit
further metabolic activity by viable O. oeni or the activity
of other lactic acid bacteria. In this regard, the addition
of lysozyme was found especially useful in limiting
the production of acetic acid and several histamines after the completion of malolactic fermentation (Gerbaux
et al., 1997). Because lysozyme results in cell rupture,
amine-generating enzymes in viable, but dormant lactic
acid bacteria, are inactivated upon release into the wine.
Depending on the likelihood of postbottling malolactic fermentation, the wine may be given sulfur dioxide, sterile-filtered into sterilized bottles or subjected to
other procedures. In-bottle malolactic fermentation is
undesirable. It can generate not only clouding and petillance (from the released carbon dioxide trapped in the
bottle) but also off-odors.

Appendix 7.1

dcont’d
Synonyms
Saccharomyces bacillaris Kroemer
and Krumbholz
Candida vini (Desmazieres ex
Lodder) van Uden and Buckley

Candida mycoderma (Reess) Lodder
and Kreger-van Rij
Mycoderma cerevisiae Desmazieres
(1823) ex Leberle
Mycoderma vini Desmazières
ex Lodder

Dekkera intermedia van der Walt

Saccharomyces mycoderma Reess

Imperfect state: Brettanomyces
intermedius (Krumbholz and
Tauschanoff) van der Walt and
van Kerken
Hanseniaspora uvarum (Niehaus) Kloeckera lodderi van Uden and
Shehata, Mrakand Phaff
Assis-Lopes
comb.nov.
Imperfect state: Kloeckera apiculata
(Reess emend. Klöcker) Janke
Hansenula anomala (Hansen) H.
and P. Sydow

Saccharomyces anomalus Hansen

Imperfect state: Candida pelliculosa
Redaelli
Kloeckera apiculata (Reess
Emend. Klöcker) Janke

Saccharomyces apiculatus Reess

Perfect state: Hanseniaspora
uvarum (Niehaus) Shehata, Mrak
and Phaff
Metschnikowia pulcherrima Pitt
and Miller

Torula pulcherrima Under

Imperfect state: Candida
pulcherrima (Lindner) Windisch

Torulopsis pulcherrima (Linder)
Sacc.
Saccharomyces pulcherrima (Linder)
Beijerinck

Partial Synonymy of several important wine yeasts.
Synonyms

Pichia fermentans Lodder

Saccharomyces dombrowskii
Sacchetti
Pichia dombrowskii Sacchetti

Brettanomyces intermedius
(Krumbholz and Tauschanoff)

Mycotorula intermedia Krumbholz
and Tauschanoff

Imperfect state: Candida lambica
(Lindner and Genoud) van Uden
and Buckley

van der Walt and van Kerken

Brettanomyces vini Peynaud and
Domercq

Pichia membranaefaciens Hansen Saccharomyces membranaefaciens
Hansen
Imperfect state: Candida valida
(Leberle) van Uden and Buckley

Perfect state: Dekkera intermedia
van der Walt
Candida stellata (Kroemer and
Krumbholz) Meyer and Yarrow

Brettanomyces italicus Verona and
Florenzano

Saccharomyces bayanus Saccardo Saccharomyces abuliensis Santa
Maria

Torulopsis bacillaris (Kroemer and
Krumbholz) Lodder

Saccharomyces globosus
Osterwalder

Torulopsis stellata (Kroemer and
Krumbholz) Lodder

Saccharomyces inusitatus van der
Walt

554

7. Fermentation

dcont’d
dcont’d
Synonyms
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Meyen
ex Hansen

Saccharomyces aceti Santa Marı́a

Synonyms
Zygosacch. Bisporus (Naganishi)
Lodder and Kreger-van Rij

Saccharomyces bisporus Naganishi

Zygosacch. florentinus Castellli ex
Kudriavzev

Saccharomyces florentinus (Castelli
ex Kudriavzev) Lodder and
Kreger-van Rij

Saccharomyces chevalieri
Guilliermond

Zygosacch. Rouxii (Boutroux)
Yarrow

Saccharomyces rouxii Boutroux

Saccharomyces coreanus Saito

Imperfect state: Candida mogii
Vidal-Leiria

Zygosacch. barkeri Saccardo and
Sydow

Saccharomyces beticus Marcilla ex
Santa Maria
Saccharomyces capensis van der
Walt and Tscheuschner

Saccharomyces diastaticus Andrews
and Gilliland ex van der Walt
Saccharomyces ellipsoideus Meyen
ex Hansen
Saccharomyces fructuum Lodder
and Kreger-van Rij

Based primarily on Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W. (Eds.), 1998. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic
Study, fourth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Kreger-van Rij, N.J.W. (Ed.),
1984. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, third ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, and Gouliamova,
D.E., Hennebert, G.L., 1998. Phylogenetic relationships in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae complex of species. Mycotaxon 66, 337e353.

Saccharomyces italicus nom. nud.
(Castelli)

Appendix 7.2

Saccharomyces norbensis Santa
Marı́a
Saccharomyces oleaceus Santa Marı́a
Saccharomyces oleaginosus Santa
Marı́a

Physiological races of Saccharomyces cerevisiae previously
given species status.

Saccharomyces oviformis
Osterwalder
Saccharomyces prostoserdovii
Kudriavzev













S. capensis



þ



þ





Saccharomyces vini Meyer ex
Kudriavzev

S. cerevisiae

þ

þ

þ

þ





S. chevalieri

þ

þ



þ





Saccharomyces carlsbergensis E. C.
Hansen

S. coreanus

þ

þ



þ

þ



S. diastaticus

þ

þ

þ

þ



þ

S. globosus

þ











S. beterogenicus 

þ

þ







S. hienipiensis





þ



þ



S. inusitatus



þ

þ

þ

þ



S. norbensis









þ



S. oleaceus

þ





þ

þ



S. oleanginosus þ



þ

þ

þ



S. prostoserdovii 



þ







þ

þ

þ







Saccharomyces monacensis E. C.
Hansen
Saccharomyces uvarum Beijerinck
Saccharomycodes ludwigii
Hansen

Saccharomyces ludwigii Hansen

Torulaspora delbrueckii (Lindner) Saccharomyces delbrueckii Linder
Lindner
Imperfect state: Candida colliculosa Saccharomyces fermentati (Saito)
(Hartmann) Meyer and Yarrow
Lodder and Kreger-van Rij
Saccharomyces rosei (Guilliermond)
Lodder and Kreger-van Rij
Zygosaccharomyces bailii
(Lindner) Guilliermond

Galactose Sucrose Maltose Raffinose Melibiose Starch
S. aceti

Saccharomyces steineri Lodder and
Kreger-van Rij

Saccharomyces pastorianus E. C.
Hansen

Fermentation

S. steineri

Saccharomyces acidifaciens
(Nickerson) Lodder and Kregervan Rij
Saccharomyces bailii Linder

After van der Walt, J.P., 1970. The genus Saccharomyces (Meyer) Reess. In: Lodder, J.
(Ed.), The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, second ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, NorthHolland, pp. 555e718, reproduced by permission.

References

References
Abrahamse, C.E., Bartowsky, E.J., 2012. Timing of malolactic fermentation inoculation in Shiraz grape must and wine: influence on chemical composition. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 28, 255e265.
Aguera, E., Bes, M., Roy, A., Camarasa, C., Sablayrolles, J.-M., 2010.
Partial removal of ethanol during fermentation to obtain reduced
alcohol wines. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 61, 53e60.
Aguilera, F., Peinado, R.A., Millán, C., Ortega, J.M., Mauricio, J.C.,
2006. Relationship between ethanol tolerance, Hþ-ATPase activity
and the lipid composition of the plasma membrane in different
wine yeast strains. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 110, 34e42.
Alcalde-Eon, C., Garcı́a-Estévez, Ferreras-Charro, R., RivasGonzalo, J.C., Ferrer-Gallego, R., 2014. Adding oenological tannin
vs. overripe grapes: effect on the phenolic composition of red
wines. J. Food Comp. Anal 34, 99e113.
Alexandre, H., Charpentier, C., 1995. Influence of fermentation medium aeration on lipid composition on fatty acids and acetic acid
production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Sci. Aliments 15, 579e592.
Aleixandre-Tudó, J.L., Álvarez, I., Lizama, V., Nieuwoudt, H.,
Garcı́a, M.J., Aleixandre, J.L., du Toit, W.J., 2016a. Modelling
phenolic and volatile composition to characterize the effects of
pre-fermentative cold soaking in Tempranillo wines. LWT-Food
Sci. Technol. 66, 193e200.
Aleixandre-Tudo, J.L., Lizama, V., Álvarez, I., Nieuwoudt, H.,
Garcı́a, M.J., Aleixandre, J.L., du Toit, W.J., 2016b. Effect of acetaldehyde addition on the phenolic substances and volatile compounds
of red Tempranillo wines. J. Grape Wine Res. 22, 205e214.
Aleixandre-Tudo, J.L., Weightman, C., Panzeri, V., Niewoudt, H.H., du
Toit, W.J., 2015. Effect of skin contact before and during alcoholic
fermentation on the chemical and sensory profile of South African
Chenin blanc white wines. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 36, 366e377.
Allen, T., Herbst-Johnstone, M., Girault, M., Butler, P., Logan, G.,
Jouanneau, S., et al., 2011. Influence of grape-harvesting steps on
varietal thiol aromas in Sauvignon blanc wines. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 59, 10641e10650.
Almeida, P., Barbosa, R., Zalar, P., Imanishi, Y., Shimizu, K., et al., 2015.
A population genomics insight into the Mediterranean origins of
wine yeast domestication. Mol. Ecol. 24, 5412e5427.
Ambrona, J., Vinagre, A., Ramirez, M., 2005. Rapid asymmetri cal evolution of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeasts. Yeast 22, 1299e1306.
Amerine, M.A., Joslyn, M.A., 1970. Table Wines, the Technology of
Their Production, second ed. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Amerine, M.A., Ough, C.S., 1980. Methods for Analysis of Musts and
Wines. John Wiley, New York, NY.
Amerine, M.A., Berg, H.W., Kunkee, R.E., Ough, C.S., Singleton, V.L.,
Webb, A.D., 1980. The Technology of Wine Making. Avi, Westport,
CT.
Antalick, G., Perello, M.C., de Revel, G., 2013. Co-inoculation with
yeast and LAB under winery conditions: modification of the aromatic profile of Merlot wines. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 34, 223e232.
Anfang, N., Brajkovich, M., Goddard, M.R., 2009. Co-fermentation
with Pichia kluyveri increases varietal thiol concentration in Sauvignon blanc. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 15, 1e8.
Anonymous, 1983. Steel feet punch the cap at Buena Vista. Wines Vines
64 (2), 52.
Ansell, R., Granath, K., Hohmann, S., Thevelein, J.M., Adler, L., 1997.
The two isoenzymes of yeast NAD-dependent glycerol 3phosphate dehydrogenase, GPD1 and GPD2 have distinct roles in
osmoadaptation and redox regulation. EMBO J. 16, 2179e2187.
Antonelli, A., Castellari, L., Zambonelli, C., Carnacini, A., 1999. Yeast
influence on volatile composition of wines. J. Agric. Food Chem.
47, 1139e1144.

555

Aranda, A., Jimenez-Marti, E., Orozco, H., Matallana, E., del Olmo, M.,
2006. Sulfur and adenine metabolisms are linked, and both modulate sulfite resistance in wine yeast. J. Agric. Food Chem. 54,
5839e5846.
Armada, L., Falqué, E., 2007. Repercussion of the clarification treat
ment agents before the alcoholic fermentation on volatile composition of white wines. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 225, 553e558.
Arnink, K., Henick-Kling, T., 2005. Influence of Saccharomycescer evisiae
and Oenococcus oeni strains on successful malolactic con version in
wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 56, 228e237.
Avbelj, M., Zupan, J., Kranjc, L., Raspor, P., 2015. Quorum-sensing kinetics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a symphony of ARO genes and aromatic alcohols. J. Agric. Food Chem. 63, 8544e8550.
Azzolini, M., Tosi, E., Veneri, G., Zapparoli, G., 2010. Evaluating the efficacy of lysozyme against lactic acid bacteria under different winemaking scenarios. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 31, 99e105.
Bach, H.P., Hess, K.H., 1986. Der Einfluß der alkoholerhöhung auf weininhaltsstoffe und geschmack. Weinwirsch. Tech. 122, 437e440.
Bach, H.P., Schneider, P., Bamberger, U., Wintrich, K.-H., 1990. Cellcracking und sein Einfluß auf die Qualität von Weißweinen. Weinwirtsch. Tech. 8, 26e34.
Bae, S., Fleet, G.H., Heard, G.M., 2006. Lactic acid bacteria associated
with wine grapes from several Australian vineyards. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 100, 712e727.
Bai, B., He, F., Yang, L., Chen, F., Reeves, M.J., Li, J., 2013. Comparative
study of phenolic compounds in Cabernet Sauvignon wines made
in traditional and Ganimede fermenters. Food Chem. 141,
3984e3992.
Baiano, A., Varva, G., De Gianni, A., Viggiani, I., Terracone, C., Del
Nobile, M.A., 2014. Influence of type of amphora on physicochemical properties and antioxidant capacity of ‘Falanghina’ white
wines. Food Chem. 146, 226e233.
Bakalinsky, A.L., Snow, R., 1990a. The chromosomal constitution of
wine strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 6, 367e382.
Bakalinsky, A.L., Snow, R., 1990b. Conversion of wine strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to heterothallism. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 56,
849e857.
Bakker, J., Brindle, P., Bellworthy, S., Garcia-Veguera, Reader, H.,
Watkins, S., 1998. Effect of sulphur dioxide and must extraction
on colour, phenolic compounds and sensory quality of red table
wine. J. Sci. Food Agric. 78, 297e307.
Barata, A., Nobre, A., Correia, P., Malfeito-Ferreira, M., Loureiro, V.,
2006. Growth and 4-ethylphenol production by the yeast Pichia guilliermondii in grape juices. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 57, 133e138.
Bartowsky, E., Costello, P., Krieger-Weber, S., Markides, A., Francis, L.,
Travis, B., 2011. Influence of MLF on the fruity characters of red
wine. Bringing chemistry and sensory science together. Wine Vitic.
J. 26 (6), 27e33.
Bartowsky, E.J., Francis, I.L., Bellon, J.R., Henschke, P.A., 2002. Is buttery aroma perception in wines predictable from the diacetyl
concentration? Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 8, 180e185.
Bartowsky, E.J., McCarthy, J.M., Henschke, P.A., 2003. Differentiation
of Australian wine isolates of Oenococcus oeni using random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD). Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 9,
122e126.
Bartowsky, E.J., Costello, P.J., Villa, A., Henschke, P.A., 2004a. The
chemical and sensorial effects of lysozyme addition to red and
white wines over six months’ cellar storage. Aust. J. Grape Wine
Res. 10, 143e150.
Bartowsky, E.J., Markides, A.J., Dillon, S.J., Dumont, A., Pretorius, I.S.,
Henschke, P.A., et al., 2004b. The potential of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeast to improve red wine colour. I. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 490, 83e85.
Bataillon, M., Rico, A., Sablayrolles, J.M., Salmon, J.M., Barre, P., 1996.
Early thiamine assimilation by yeasts under enological conditions:

556

7. Fermentation

impact on alcoholic fermentation kinetics. J. Ferm. Bioeng. 128,
1445e1447.

 s, F., Vanzo, A., Gasperlin, L., Kosmer, T.,
Bavcar, D., Cesnik,
H.B., Cu
2011. Impact of alternative skin contact procedures on the aroma
composition of white wine. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 32, 190e203.
Beker, M.J., Rapoport, A.I., 1987. Conservation of yeasts by
rehydration. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 35, 127e171.
Belin, J.M., 1972. Recherches sur la répartition des levures à la sur face
de la grappe de raisin. Vitis 11, 135e145.
Bellon, J.R., Eglinton, J.M., Siebert, T.E., Pollitz, A.P., Rose, L., Lopes, M.
de B., Chambers, P.J., 2011. Newly generated interspecific wine
yeast hybrids introduce flavour and aroma diversity to wines.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 91, 603e612.
Bely, M., Sablayrolles, J.M., Barre, P., 1990. Automatic detection of
assimilable nitrogen deficiencies during alcoholic fermentation in
oenological conditions. J. Ferment. Bioeng. 70, 246e252.
Bely, M., Salmon, J.M., Barre, P., 1994. Assimilable nitrogen addition
and hexose transport system activity during enological
fermentation. J. Inst. Brew. 100, 279e282.
Benito, S., Plaomero, F., Morata, A., Calderón, F., Palermo, D., SuárezLepe, J., 2013. Physiological features of Schizosaccharomyces pombe
on interest in the making of white wines. Eur. Food Res. Technol.
236, 29e36.
Berovic, M., Herga, M., 2007. Heat shock on Saccharomyces cerevisiae
inoculum
increases
glycerol
production
during
wine
fermentation. Biotechnol. Lett. 29, 891e894.
Bertrand, A., Miele, A., 1984. Influence de la clarification du moût de
raisin sur sa teneur en acides gras. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 18, 293e297.
Bertrand, A., Torres-Alegre, V., 1984. Influence of oxygen added to
grape must on the synthesis of secondary products of the alcoholic
fermentation. Sci. Aliments 4, 45e64.
Bett, K.E., Cappi, J.B., 1965. Effect of pressure on the viscosity of water.
Nature 207, 620e621.
Bindon, K.A., Kennedy, J.A., 2011. Ripening-induced changes in grape
skin proanthocyanidins modify their interaction with cell walls.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 59, 2696e2707.
Bindon, K.A., Smith, P.A., Holt, H., Kennedy, J.A., 2010. Interaction between grape-derived proanthocyanidins and cell wall material. 2.
Implications for vinification. J. Agric. Food Chem. 58, 10736e10746.
Bindon, K., Holt, H., Williamson, P.O., Varela, C., Herderich, M.,
Francis, I.L., 2014. Relationships between harvest time and wine
composition in Vitis vinifera L. cv. Cabernet Sauvignon 2. Wine sensory properties and consumer preference. Food Chem. 154, 90e101.
Birch, R.M., Ciani, M., Walker, G.M., 2003. Magnesium, calcium and
fermentative metabolism in wine yeasts. J. Wine Res. 14, 3e15.
Bisson, L.F., Butzke, C.E., 2000. Diagnosis and rectification of stuck and
sluggish fermentations. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 51, 168e177.
Biyela, B.N.E., du Toit, W.J., Divol, B., Malherbe, D.F., van Rensburg, P.,
2009. The production of reduced-alcohol wines using Gluzyme
MonoÒ10.000 BG-treated grape juice. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 30,
124e132.
Bloem, S., Lonvaud-Funel, A., de Revel, G., 2008. Hydrolysis of glycosidically bound flavor compounds from oak wood by Oenococcus
oeni. Food Microbiol. 25, 99e104.
Bokulich, N.A., Ohta, M., Richardson, P.M., Mills, D.A., 2013. Monitoring seasonal changes in winery-resident microbiota. PLos ONE
8, e66437.
Bokulich, N.A., Thorngate, J.H., Richardson, P.M., Mills, D.A., 2014.
Microbial biogeography of wine grapes in conditioned by cultivar,
vintage and climate. PNAS 111, E139eE148.
Bokulich, N.A., Swadener, M., Sakamoto, K., Mills, D.A., Bisson, L.F.,
2015. Sulfur dioxide treatment alters wine microbial diversity and
fermentation progression in a dose-dependent fashion. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 66, 73e79.
Bonghi, C., Rizzini, F.M., Gambuti, A., Moio, L., Chkaiban, L.,
Tonutti, P., 2012. Phenol compound metabolism and grpression in

the skin of wine grape (Vitis vinifera L.) berries subjected to partial
postharvest dehydration. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 67, 102e109.
Bony, M., Bidart, F., Camarasa, C., Ansanay, L., Dulau, L., Barre, P.,
et al., 1997. Metabolic analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
engineered for malolactic fermentation. FEBS Lett. 410, 452e256.
Bony, M., Barre, P., Blondin, B., 1998. Distribution of the flocculation
protein, FLOP, at the cell surface during yeast growth: the avail ability of Flop determines the flocculation level. Yeast 14, 25e35.
Boone, C., Sdicu, A.-M., Wagner, J., Degré, R., Sanchez, C., Bussey, H.,
1990. Integration of the yeast K1 killer toxin gene into the genome of
marked wine yeasts and its effect on vinification. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
41, 37e42.
Borneman, A.R., Forgan, A.H., Kolouchova, R., Fraser, J.A.,
Schmidt, S.A., 2016. Whole genome comparision reveals high levels
of inbreeding and strain redundancy across the spectrum of commercial wine strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. G3: Genes Genomes
Genet. 6, 957e971.
Bosso, A., Panero, L., Guaita, M., Marulli, C., 2001. La tecnica del delestage nelle vinificazione del Montepulciano d’Abruzzo. Enologo 37,
87e96.
Bosso, A., Panero, L., Petrozziello, M., Follis, R., Motta, S., Guaita, M.,
2011. Influence of submerged-cap vinification on polyphenolic
composition and volatile compounds of Barbera wines. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 62, 503e511.
Bouix, M., Leveau, J.Y., Cuinier, C., 1981. Applications de l’électophorese des fractions exocellulaires de levures au con trôle de l’efficacité
d’un levurage en vinification. In: Stewart, G.G., Russel, I. (Eds.).
Current Developments in Yeast Research Pergamon, New York,
NY, pp. 87e92.
Boulton, R., 1979. The heat transfer characteristics of wine fermen tors.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 152e156.
Bourdineaud, J.P., 2006. Both arginine and fructose stimulate pH independent resistance in the wine bacteria Oenococcus oeni. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 107, 274e280.
Bousbouras, G.E., Kunkee, R.E., 1971. Effect of pH on malo-lactic
fermentation in wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 22, 121e126.
Bréchot, P., Chauvet, J., Dupuy, P., Croson, M., Rabatu, A., 1971. Acide
olénolique, facteur de croissance anaérobie de la levure de vin. C.R.
Acad. Sci. Ser. D 272, 890e893.
Brenna, O., Bianchi, E., 1994. Immobilised laccase for phenolic removal
in must and wine. Lett. Biotechnol. 16, 35e40.
Brewster, J.L., de Valoir, T., Dwyer, N.D., Winter, E., Gustin, M.C., 1993.
An osmosensing signal transduction pathway in yeast. Science 259,
1760e1763.
Brice, C., Sanchez, I., Tesnière, C., Blondin, B., 2014. Assessing the
mechanisms responsible for differences between nitrogen requirements of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeasts in alcoholic
fermentation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 1330e1339.
Bucelli, P., Faviere, V., Scotti, B., Piraccia, A., Giannetti, F., Bergaglio, F.,
2006. Effect of the application of maceration enzymes on red wine
colour stability. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 514 (71e72),
74e75.
Buechsenstein, J., Ough, C.S., 1979. Comparison of citric, di-malic, and
fumaric acids as wine acidulants. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 93e97.
Burns, T.R., Osborne, J.P., 2015. Loss of Pinot noir wine color and polymeric pigment after malolactic fermentation and potential causes.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 66, 130e137.
Burtch, C.F., Mansfield, A.K., Manns, D.C., 2017. Reaction kinetics of
monomeric anthocyanin conversion to polymeric pigments and
their significance to color in interspecific hybrid wines. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 65, 6379e6386.
Busse-Valverde, N., Gómez-Plaza, E., López-Roca, J.M., GilMuñoz, R., Fernández-Fernández, J.A., Bautista-Ortı́n, A.B.,
2010. Effect of different enological practices on skin and seed
proanthocyanidins in three varietal wines. J. Agric. Food Chem.
58, 11333e11339.

References

Butzke, C.E., 2010. What Is the Best Way to Cold Settle My White Juice?
In: Butzke, C.E. (Ed.) Wine making Problems Solved Woodhead
Publishing Limited, Cambridge, UK, pp. 31e32.
Cabras, P., Meloni, M., Melis, M., Farris, G.A., Bufroni, M., Satta, T.,
1994. Interactions between lactic bacteria and fungicides during lactic fermentation. J. Wine Res. 5, 53e59.
Cabras, P., Garau, V.L., Angioni, A., Farris, G.A., Budroni, M.,
Spanedda, L., 1995. Interactions during fermentation between pesticides and oenological yeasts producing H2S and SO2. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 43, 370e373.
Caldini, C., Bonomi, F., Pifferi, P.G., Lanzarini, G., Galante, Y.M., 1994.
Kinetic and immobilization studies on fungal glycosidases for aroma
enhancement in wine. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 16, 286e291.
Campos, F.M., Figueiredo, A.R., Hogg, T.A., Couto, J.A., 2009. Effect of
phenolic acids on glucose and organic acid metabolism by lactic
acid bacteria from wine. Food Microbiol. 26, 409e414.
Canal-Llaubères, R.-M., 1993. Enzymes in winemaking. In: Fleet, G.H.
(Ed.), Wine Microbiology and Biotechnology. Harwood Academic,
Chur, Switzerland, pp. 447e506.
Canals, R., Llaudy, M.C., Canals, J.M., Zamora, F., 2008. Influence of the
addition and elimination of seeds on the colour, phenolic composition and astringency of red wine. Eur. Food. Res. Technol. 226,
1183e1190.
Canals, R., Llaudy, M.C., Valls, J., Canals, J.M., Zamora, F., 2005. Influence of ethanol concentration on the extraction of color and phenolic
compounds from the skin and seeds of Tempranillo grapes at
different stages of ripening. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 4019e4025.
Cantarelli, C., 1989. Phenolics and yeast: remarks concerning fer
mented beverages. Yeast 5, S53eS61.
Cao, D., Tu, M., Xie, R., Li, J., Wu, Y., Adhikari, S., 2014. Inhibitory activity of carbonyl compounds on alcoholic fermentation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62, 918e926.
Carew, A.L., Smith, P., Close, D.C., Curtin, C., Damberegs, R.G., 2013.
Yeast effects on Pinot noir wine phenolics, color, and tannin
composition. J. Agric. Food Chem. 61, 9892e9698.
Caridi, A., Corte, V., 1997. Inhibition of malolactic fermentation by cryotolerant yeasts. Biotechnol. Lett. 19, 723e726.
Carre, E., Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Bertrand, A., 1983. Désacidification
biologique des vins blancs secs par fermentation de l’acide mal
ique par les levures. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 17, 43e53.
Carreté, R., Vidal, M.T., Bordons, A., Constanti, M., 2002. Inhibitory effect of sulfur dioxide and other stress compounds in wine on the
ATPase activity of Oenococcus oeni. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 211,
155e159.
Cartwright, C.P., Rose, A.H., Calderbank, J., Keenan, M.J., 1989. Solute
transport. In: Rose, A.H., Harrison, J.S. (Eds.), The Yeasts, , second
ed.vol. 3. Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. 5e56.
Casey, G.P., Ingledew, W.M., 1986. Ethanol tolerance in yeasts. Crit.
Rev. Microbiol. 13, 219e280.
Casassa, L.F., Bolcato, E.S., Sari, S.E., Fanzone, M.L., Jofré, V.P., 2016.
Combined effect of prefermentative cold soak and SO2 additions
in Barbera D’Asti and Malbec wines: anthocyanin composition,
chromatic and sensory properties. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 66,
134e142.
Castellari, L., Ferruzzi, M., Magrini, A., Giudici, P., Passarelli, P.,
Zambonelli, C., 1994. Unbalanced wine fermentation by cryotolerant vs. non-cryotolerant Saccharomyces strains. Vitis 33, 49e52.
Castellari, L., Magrini, A., Passarelli, P., Zambonelli, C., 1995. Effect of
must fermentation temperature on minor products formed by cryoand non-cryotolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. Ital. J. Food
Sci. 7, 125e132.
Catania, P., Pipitone, F., Vallone, M., 2011. Comparison between two
types of winemaking tanks for the production of quality wines cv.
Nero d’Avola. J. Ag. Eng.e Riv. Ing. Agr 2, 19e24.
Cavalieri, D., Townsend, J.P., Hartl, D.L., 2000. Manifold anomalies in
gene expression in a vineyard isolate of Saccharomyces cerevisiae

557

revealed by DNA microarray analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 97,
12369e12374.
Cavazza, A., Grando, M.S., Zini, C., 1992. Rilevazione della flora
microbica di mosti e vini. Vignivini 19 (9), 17e20.
Cavazza, A., Franciosi, E., Pojer, M., Mattivi, F., 2007. Washing the
grapes before crushing: effects on contaminants and fermentation.
Bull. O.I.V. 80, 483e496.
Cavin, J.F., Drici, F.Z., Prevost, H., Diviès, C., 1991. Prophage cur ing in
Leuconostoc oenos by mitomycin C induction. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 42,
163e166.
Cavin, J.F., Andioc, V., Etiévant, P.X., Diviès, C., 1993. Ability of wine
lactic acid bacteria to metabolize phenol carboxylic acids. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 44, 76e80.
Cebollero, E., Gonzales-Ramos, D., Tabera, L., Gonzalez, R., 2007.
Transgenic wine yeast technology comes of age: is it time for transgenic wine? Biotechnol. Lett. 29, 191e200.
Cejudo-Bastante, M.J., Castro-Vázquez, L., Hermosı́n-Gutiérrez, I.,
Pérez-Coello, M.S., 2011a. Combined effects of prefermentative
skin maceration and oxygen addition of must on color-related phenolics, volatile composition, and sensory characteristics of Airén
white wine. J. Agric. Food Chem. 59, 12171e12182.
Cejudo-Bastante, M.J., Hermosı́n-Gutiérrez, I., Castro-Vázquez, L.I.,
Pérez-Coello, M.S., 2011b. Hyperoxygenation and bottle storage
of Chardonnay white wines: effects on color-related phenolics, volatile composition, and sensory characteristics. J. Agric. Food Chem.
59, 4171e4182.
Chaptal, J.-A.-C., Rozier, F., Parmentier, A.A., d’Ussieux, L., 1801. Traité
Théorique et Practique sur la Culture de la Vigne, vol. 2. Delalain et
Fils, Paris.
Charpentier, C., 2000. Yeast autolysis and yeast macromolecules? Their
contribution to wine flavor and stability IProc. In: ASEV 50th Anniversary Annual Meeting, Seattle, Washington June 19e23, 2000.
American Society for Enology and Viticulture, Davis, CA,
pp. 271e277.
Chatonnet, P., Dubourdieu, P., Boidron, J.N., 1989. Incidence decertains
facteurs sur la décarboxylation des acides phénols par la lev ure.
Connaiss. Vigne Vin 23, 59e63.
Chatonnet, P., Barbe, C., Canal-Llauberes, R.-M., Dubourdieu, D.,
Boidron, J.N., 1992. Incidences de certaines préparations pectoly
tiques sur la teneur en phénols volatils des vins blancs. J. Int. Sci.
Vigne Vin 26, 253e269.
Chauvet, S., Sudraud, P., Jouan, T., 1986. La cryoextraction sélective des
moûts. Rev. Oenologues 39, 17e22.
Cheraiti, N., Guezenec, S., Salmon, J.M., 2005. Redox interactions between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces uvarum in mixed
culture under enological conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71,
255e260.
Cheynier, V., Souquet, J.-M., Samson, A., Moutounet, M., 1991. Hyperoxidation: influence of various oxygen supply levels on oxidation
kinetics of phenolic compounds and wine quality. Vitis 30,
107e115.
Ciani, M., Maccarelli, F., 1998. Oenological properties of non Saccharomyces yeasts associated with wine making. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 14, 199e203.
Ciani, M., Picciotti, G., 1995. The growth kinetics and fermentation
behaviour of some non-Saccharomyces yeasts associated with wine
making. Biotechnol. Lett. 17, 1247e1250.
Ciani, M., Mannazzu, I., Marinangeli, P., Clementi, F., Martini, A., 2004.
Contribution of winery-resident Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains to
spontaneous grape must fermentation. Antonie van Leewenhoek
85, 159e164.
Ciani, M., Beco, L., Comitini, F., 2006. Fermentation behaviour and
metabolic interactions of multistarter wine yeast fermentations.
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 108, 239e245.
Ciezack, G., Hazo, L., Chambat, G., Heyraud, A., Lonvaud-Funel, A.,
Dols-Lafargue, M., 2010. Evidence for exopolysaccharide

558

7. Fermentation

production by Oenococcus oeni strains isolated from non-ropy
wines. J. Appl. Microbiol. 108, 499e509.
Clark, A.C., Vestner, J., Barril, C., Maury, C., Prenzler, P.D.,
Scollary, G.R., 2010. The influence of stereochemistry of antioxidants and flavanols on oxidation processes in a model wine system:
ascorbic acid, erythorbic, (þ)-catechin and ()-epicatechin. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 58, 1004e1011.
Cleveland, J., Montville, T.J., Nes, I.F., Chikindas, M.L., 2001. Bacteriocins: safe, natural antimicrobials for food preservation. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 71, 1e20.
Cocito, C., Delfini, C., 1997. Experiments for developing selective clarification techniques: sterol and fatty acid loss from grape must
related to clarification technique. J. Wine Res. 8, 187e198.
Cocolin, L., Mills, D.A., 2003. Wine yeast inhibition by sulfur dioxide: a
comparison of culture-dependent and independent methods. Am.
J. Enol. Vitic. 54, 125e130.
Cocolin, L., Bisson, L.F., Mills, D.A., 2000. Direct profiling of the yeast
dynamics in wine fermentations. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 189, 81e87.
Comitini, F., Capece, A., Ciani, M., Romano, P., 2017. New insights on
the use of wine yeasts. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 13, 44e49.
Comitini, F., Ferretti, R., Clementi, F., Mannazzu, I., Ciani, M., 2005.
Interactions between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and malolactic bacteria: preliminary characterization of a yeast proteinaceous compound(s) active against Oenococcus oeni. J. Appl. Microbiol. 99,
105e111.
Conner, A.J., 1983. The comparative toxicity of vineyard pesticides to
wine yeasts. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 34, 278e279.
Contreras, A., Hidalgo, C., Schmidt, S., Henschke, P.A., Curtin, C.,
Varela, C., 2015. The application of non-Saccharomyces yeast in fermentations with limited aeration as a strategy for the production
of wine with reduced alcohol content. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 205,
7e15.
Cordente, T., Heinrich, A., Swiegers, H., 2007. A new revolution in
wine: yeast strains that produce no detectable hydrogen sulfide.
Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 526, 110, 112, 114.
Cordente, T., Heinrich, A., Pretorius, I.S., Swiegers, H., 2009. Isolation
of sulfite reductase variants of a commercial wine yeast with significantly reduced hydrogen sulfide production. FEMS Yeast Res. 9,
446e459.
Corona, O., 2010. Wine making with protection of must against oxidation in a warm, semi-arid. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 31, 58e63.
Costello, P.J., Morrison, R.H., Lee, R.H., Fleet, G.H., 1983. Numbers and
species of lactic acid bacteria in wines during vinification. Food
Tech. Aust. 35, 14e18.
Costello, P.J., Henschke, P.A., Markides, A.J., 2003. Standardised methodology for testing malolactic bacteria and wine yeast
compatibility. Aust J. Grape Wine Res. 9, 127e137.
Coton, E., Rollan, G., Bertrand, A., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 1998.
Histamine-producing lactic acid bacteria in wines: early detection,
frequency, and distribution. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 49, 199e204.
Cozzolino, D., Cynkar, W., Shah, N., Smith, P., 2011. Technical solutions
for analysis of grape juice, must, and wine: the role of infra red
spectroscopy and chemometrics. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 40,
1475e1484.
Crépin, L., Nidelet, T., Sanchez, I., Dequin, S., Camarasa, C., 2012.
Sequential use of nitrogen compounds by Saccharomyces cerevisiae
during wine fermentation: a model based on kinetic and regulation
characteristics of nitrogen permeases. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78,
8102e8111.
Crippen Jr., D.D., Morrison, J.C., 1986. The effects of sun exposure on
the phenolic content of Cabernet Sauvignon berries during
development. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 37, 243e247.
Cubillos, F.A., Vásquez, C., Faugeron, S., Ganga, A., Martı́nez, C.,
2009. Self-fertilization is the main sexual reproduction mechanism
in native wine yeast populations. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 67,
162e170.

Cuénat, P., Zufferey, E., Kobel, D., Bregy, C.A., Crettenand, J., 1991. Le
cuvage du Pinot noir, rôle des températures. Rev. Suisse Vitic.
Arboric. Hortic. 23, 267e272.
Cureil, J.A., Muñoz, R., López De Felipe, F., 2010. Delaying effect of a
wine Lactobacillus plantarum strain on the coloration and xanthylium pigment formation occurring in (þ)-catechin and ()-epicatechin wine model solutions. J. Agric. Food Chem. 58, 11318e11324.
Da Silveira, M., Golovina, G.A., Hoekstra, F.A., Rombouts, F.M.,
Abee, T., 2003. Membrane fluidity adjustments in ethanol stressed
Oenococcus oeni cells. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 5826e5832.
Dahabieh, M.S., Husnik, J.I., van Vuuren, H.J.J., 2009. Functional
expression of the DUR3 gene in a wine yeast strain to minimize
ethyl carbamate in Chardonnay wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 60,
537e541.
Darby, W.J., Ghalioungui, P., Grivetti, L., 1977. Food: The Gift of Osiris,
vol. 2. Academic Press, London, UK.
Dasari, G., Worth, M.A., Connor, M.A., Pamment, N.B., 1990. Reasons
for the apparent difference in the effects of produced and added
ethanol on culture viability during rapid fermentations by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 35, 109e122.
Davis, C.R., Wibowo, D., Eschenbruch, R., Lee, T.H., Fleet, G.H., 1985.
Practical implications of malolactic fermentation: a review. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 36, 290e301.
Davis, C.R., Wibowo, D.J., Lee, T.H., Fleet, G.H., 1986a. Growth and
metabolism of lactic acid bacteria during and after malolactic
fermentation of wines at different pH. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
51, 539e545.
Davis, C.R., Wibowo, D., Lee, T.H., Fleet, G.H., 1986b. Growth and
metabolism of lactic acid bacteria during fermentation and conservation of some Australian wines. Food Technol. Aust. 36, 35e40.
Diviès, C., Cachon, R., Cavin, J.-F., Prévost, H., 1994. Immobolized cell
technology in wine production. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 14, 135e153.
Defranoux, C., Gineys, D., Joseph, P., 1989. Le potentiel aromatique du
Chardonnay. Essai d’utilisation des techniques de cryoextraction et
de supraextraction (procédé Kreyer). Rev. Oenologues 55, 27e29.
Delfini, C., Cersosimo, M., Del Prete, V., Strano, M., Gaetano, G.,
Pagliara, A., et al., 2004. Resistance screening essay of wine lac tic
acid bacteria on lysozyme: efficacy of lysozyme in unclarified grape
musts. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52, 1861e1866.
Delfini, C., Cervetti, F., 1991. Metabolic and technological factors
affecting acetic acid production by yeasts during alcoholic
fermentation. Wein-Wiss 46, 142e150.
Delfini, C., Cocito, C., Ravaglia, S., Conterno, L., 1993. Influence of clarification and suspended grape solid materials on sterol content of
free run and pressed grape musts in the presence of growing yeast
cells. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 44, 452e459.
Delfini, C., Morsiani, M.G., 1992. Resistance to sulfur dioxide of malolactic strains of Leuconostoc oenos and Lactobacillus sp. isolated from
wines. Sci. Aliments 12, 493e511.
Delfini, C., Pessioni, E., Moruno, E.G., Giunta, C., 1992. Localization of
volatile acidity reducing factors in grapes. J. Indust. Microbiol. 11,
19e22.
de Barros Lopes, M., Bellon, J.R., Shirley, N.J., Ganter, P.F., 2002. Evidence for multiple interspecific hybridization in Saccharomyces
sensu stricto species. FEMS Yeast Res. 1, 323e331.
de Deken, R.H., 1966. The crabtree effect: a regulatory system in yeast.
J. Gen. Microbiol. 44, 149e156.
Demuyter, C., Lollier, M., Legras, J.-L., Le Jeune, C., 2004. Predominance of Saccharomyces uvarum during spontaneous alcoholic
fermentation, for three consecutive years, in an Alsatian winery.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 97, 1140e1148.
Dengis, P.B., Rouxhet, P.G., 1997. Flocculation mechanisms of top and
bottom fermenting brewing yeasts. J. Inst. Brew. 103, 257e261.
Dennis, E.G., Keyzers, R.A., Kalua, C.M., Maffei, S.M., Nicholson, E.L.,
Boss, P.K., 2012. Grape contribution to wine aroma: production of
hexyl acetate, octyl acetate, and benzyl acetate during yeast

References

fermentation is dependent upon precursors in the must. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 60, 2638e2646.
Desens, C., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 1988. Étude de la constitution lipidique
des membranes de bactéries lactiques utilisées en vinification. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 22, 25e32.
Deytieux, C., Mussard, L., Biron, M.-J., Salmon, J.-M., 2005. Fine measurements of ergosterol requirements for growth of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae during alcoholic fermentation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 68, 266e271.
Dewey, F.M., Meyer, U., 2004. Rapid, quantitative Tube immunoassays
from on-site detection of Botrytis, Aspergillus and Penicillium antigens in grape juice. Anal. Chim. Acta 513, 11e19.
Dı́az-Hellı́n, P., Gómez-Alonso, S., Borrull, A., Rozès, N., CorderoOtero, R., Úbeda, J., 2014. Membrane lipid variability in Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains rehydrated in the presence of metabolic
activators. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62, 8679e8685.
DiCarlo, J.E., Conley, A.J., Penttila, M., Jäntti, J., Wang, H.H.,
Church, G.M., 2013. Yeast oligi-mediated genome engineering
(YOGE). ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 741e749.
Dick, K.I., Molan, P.C., Eschenbruch, R., 1992. The isolation from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae of two antibacterial cationic proteins that
inhibit malolactic bacteria. Vitis 31, 105e116.
Dittrich, H.H., 1977. Mikrobiologie des Weines, Handbuch der
Getränketechnologie. Ulmer, Stuttgart, Germany.
Dizy, M., Bisson, L.F., 2000. Proteolytic activity of yeast strains during
grape juice fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 51, 155e167.
Dols-Lafargue, M., Gindreau, E., Le Marrec, C., Chambat, G.,
Heyraud, A., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2007. Changes in red wine soluble
polysaccharide composition induced by malolactic fermentation.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 55, 9592e9599.
Donaldson, A., 2008. Alcohol levels in wine: australian researchers
respond. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 537 (68), 70e72.
Donsi, F., Ferrari, G., Fruilo, M., Pataro, G., 2010. Pulsed electric fieldassisted vinification of Aglianico and Piedirosso grapes. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 58, 11606e11615.
Drici-Cachon, Z., Cavin, J.F., Diviès, C., 1996. Effect of pH and age of
culture on cellular fatty acid composition of Leuconostoc oenos.
Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 22, 331e334.
Dubernet, M., 2010. Automatic analysers in Oenology. In: Moreno
Arribas, M., Polo, C. (Eds.), Wine Chemistry and Biochemistry.
Springer Verlag, New York/Heidelberg, pp. 649e676.
Dubernet, M., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1974. Causes et conséquences de la
consommation de l’oxygène par les moûts de raisin. Vitis 13,
133e244.
Dubourdieu, D., Lavigne, V., 1990. Incidence de l’hyperoxidation sur la
composition chimique et les qualitiés organoleptiques des vins
blancs du Bordelais. Rev. Fr. Oenol. 30, 58e61.
Dubourdieu, D., Sokol, A., Zucca, J., Thalouarn, P., Dattee, A.,
Aigle, M., 1987. Identification des souches de levures isolées de
vins par l’analyse de leur AND mitochondrial. Connaiss. Vigne
Vin 21, 267e278.
Ducasse, M.-A., Canal-Llauberes, R.-M., de Lumley, M., Williams, P.,
Souquet, J.-M., Fulcrand, et al., 2010. Effect of macerating enzyme
treatment on the polyphenol and polysaccharide composition of
red wines. Food Chem. 118, 369e376.
Dukes, B.C., Butzke, C.E., 1998. Rapid determination of primary amino
acids in grape juice using an o-phthaldialdehyde/N-acetyl Lcysteine spectrophotometric assay. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 49, 125e134.
Duitschaever, C.L., Alba, J., Buteau, C., Allen, B., 1991. Riesling wines
made from must concentrated by reverse osmosis, I. Experimental
conditions and composition of musts and wines. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
42, 19e25.
Dumont, A., Dulau, L., 1996. The role of yeasts in the formation of wine
flavors. In: Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool Climate
Vitic. Enol. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station,
Geneva, NY pp. VIe24e28.

559

D’Incecco, N., Bartowsky, E., Kassara, S., Lante, A., Spettoli, P.,
Henschke, P., 2004. Release of glycosidically bound flavour compounds of Chardonnay by Oenococcus oeni during malolactic
fermentation. Food Microbiol. 21, 257e265.
Edwards, C.G., Beelman, R.B., Bartley, C.E., McConnell, A.L., 1990.
Production of decanoic acid and other volatile compounds and
the growth of yeast and malolactic bacteria during vinification.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 41, 48e56.
Edwards, C.G., Haag, K.M., Semon, M.J., Rodriguez, A.V.,
Mills, J.M., 1999. Evaluation of processing methods to control
the growth of Lactobacillus kunkeei, a microorganism implicated
in sluggish alcoholic fermentations of grape musts. S. Afr. J.
Enol. Vitic. 20, 11e18.
Egli, C.M., Edinger, W.D., Mitrakul, C.M., Henick-Kling, T., 1998. Dynamics of indigenous and inoculated yeast populations and their
effect on the sensory character of Riesling and Chardonnay
wines. J. Appl. Microbiol. 85, 779e789.
Eglinton, J., Griesser, M., Henschke, P., Kwiatkowski, M., Parker, M.,
Herderich, M., 2004. Yeast-mediated formation of pigmented
polymers in red wine. In: Waterhouse, A.L., Kennedy, J.A.
(Eds.), Red Wine Color. Revealing the Mysteries American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, pp. 7e21. ACS Symposium Series,
No. 886.
Eglinton, J.M., Buckingham, L., Henschke, P.A., 1993. Increased volatile
acidity of white wines by chemical vitamin mixtures is grape juice
dependent. In: Stockley, C.S. (Ed.), Proc. 8th Aust. Wine Ind. Tech.
Conf. Winetitles, Adelaide, Australia, pp. 197e198.
Eglinton, J.M., McWilliam, S.J., Fogarty, M.W., Francis, I.L.,
Kwiatkowski, M.J., Hoj, P.B., et al., 2000. The effect of Saccharomyces
bayanus-mediated fermentation on the chemical composition and
aroma profile of Chardonnay wine. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 6,
190e196.
Eglinton, J.M., Heinrich, A.J., Pollnitz, A.P., Langridge, P.,
Henschke, P.A., de Barros Lopes, M., 2002. Decreasing acetic acid
accumulation by a glycerol overproducing strain of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by deleting the ALD6 aldehyde dehydrogenase gene.
Yeast 19, 295e301.
El Darra, N., Grimi, N., Vorobiev, E., Maroun, R.G., Louka, N., 2013.
Pulsed electric field-assisted cold maceration of Cabernet franc
and Cabernet Sauvignon grapes. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 64, 476e484.
Erten, H., 2002. Relations between elevated temperatures and fermentation behavious of Kloeckera apiculata and Saccharomyces cerevisiae
associated with winemaking in mixed cultures. World J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 18, 373e378.
Falconer, R.J., Hart, A., 2005. MOG removal system makes its mark.
Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 501, 18e22.
Farkas, J., 1988. Technology and Biochemistry of Wine, vols. 1 and 2.
Gordon & Breach, New York, NY.
Farris, G.A., Fatichenti, F., Deiana, P., 1989. Incidence de la température
et du pH sur la production d’acide malique par Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J. Int. Sci. Vigne Vin 23, 89e93.
Favier, M., Bilhère, E., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Renouf, V., Moine, V.,
Lucas, P., 2011. A plasmid contributing to wine adaptation and
technological properties of Oenococcus oeni strains. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 62, 386Ae384A.
Fay, J.C., Liu, P., Ong, G.T., Dunham, M.J., Cromie, G.A., Jeffery, E.W.,
et al., 2019. A polyploid admixed origin of beer yeasts derived from
European and Asian wine populations. PlOS Biol. 17, e3000147.
Fernández, M.J., Oliva, J., Barba, A., Cámara, M.A., 2005. Fungicide
dissipation curves in winemaking processes with and without
maceration step. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 804e811.
Fernández-Baldo, M.A., Messina, G.A., Sanz, M.I., Raba, J., 2010.
Microfluidic immunosensor with micromagnetic beads coupled
to carbon-based screen-printed electrodes (SPCEs) for determination of Botrytis cinerea in tissue of fruits. J. Agric. Food Chem. 58,
11201e11206.

560

7. Fermentation

Ferrando, M., Guell, C., Lopez, F., 1998. Industrial wine making: comparison of must clarification treatments. J. Agric. Food Chem. 46,
1523e1528.
Ferrarini, R., Celotti, E., Zironi, R., Buiatti, S., 1995. Recent advances in
the progress of flotation applied to the clarification of grape musts.
J. Wine Res. 6, 19e33.
Feuillat, M., 1996. Vinification du Pinot noir en bourgogne par macération préfermentaire à froid. Rev. Oenologues 82, 29e31.
Feuillat, M., Guilloux-Benatier, Gerbaux, V., 1985. Essais d’activation de
la fermentation malolactique dans les vins. Sci. Aliments 5, 103e122.
Fia, G., Olivier, V., Cavaglioni, A., Canuti, V., Zanoni, B., 2016. Side activities of commercial enzyme preparations and their influence on
the hydroxycinnamic acids, volatile compounds and nitrogenous
components of white wine. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 22, 366e375.
Firme, M.P., Leitao, M.C., San Romao, M.V., 1994. The metabolism of
sugar and malic acid by Leuconostoc oenos, effect of malic acid, pH
and aeration conditions. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 76, 173e181.
Fleet, G.H., Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1984. Evolution
of yeasts and lactic acid bacteria during fermentation and storage
of Bordeaux wines. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 48, 1034e1038.
Fleet, G.H., Heard, G.M., Gao, C., 1989. The effect of temperature on the
growth and ethanol tolerance of yeasts during wine fermentation.
Yeast 5, S43eS46.
Formisyn, P., Vaillant, H., Lantreibecq, F., Bourgois, J., 1997. Development of an enzymatic reactor for initiating malolactic fermentation
in wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 48, 345e351.
Fornairon-Bonnefond, C., Aguera, E., Deytieux, C., Sablayrolles, J.-M.,
Salmon, J.-M., 2003. Impact of oxygen addition during enological
fermentation on sterol contents in yeast lees and their reactivity towards oxygen. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 95, 496e503.
Frivik, S.K., Ebeler, S.E., 2003. Influence of sulfur dioxide on the formation of aldehydes in white wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 54, 31e38.
Froment, T., 1991. Auto-enrichissement des moûts de raisin: le concentrateur Entropie (type M.T.A.) par évaporation sous vide à très
basse température (20 C). Rev. Oenologues 57, 7e11.
Gancelos, C., Serrano, R., 1989. Energy-yielding metabolism. In:
Rose, A.H., Harrison, J.S. (Eds.), The Yeasts, , second ed.vol. 3. Academic Press, New York, pp. 205e259.
Gao, C., Fleet, G.H., 1988. The effects of temperature and pH on the
ethanol tolerance of the wine yeasts, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Candida stellata and Kloeckera apiculata. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 65,
405e410.
Garcia, A., Carcel, C., Dulau, L., Samson, E., Aguera, E., Agosin, E.,
et al., 2002. Influence of a mixed culture with Debaryomyces vanriji
and Saccharomyces cerevisiae on the volatiles of a Muscat wine.
J. Food Sci. 67, 1138e1143.
Garcı́a-Carpintero, E.G., Sánchez-Palomo, E., González Viñas, M.A.,
2010. Influence of co-winemaking technique in sensory characteristics of new Spanish red wines. Food Qual. Pref. 21, 705e710.
Garcı́a-Rı́os, E., Gutiérrez, A., Salvadó, Z., Arroyo-López, F.N.,
Guillamon, J.M., 2014. The fitness advantage of commercial wine
yeasts in relation to the nitrogen concentration, temperature, and
ethanol content under microvinification conditions. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 80, 704e713.
Gardner, J.M., Poole, K., Jiranek, V., 2002. Practical significance of relative assimilable nitrogen requirements of yeast: a preliminary study
of fermentation performance and liberation of H2S. Aust. J. Grape
Wine Res. 8, 175e179.
Genisheva, Z., Mussatto, S.I., Oliveira, J.M., Teixeira, J.A., 2013. Malolactic fermentation of wines with immobilised lactic acid bacteria
- Influence of concentration, type of support material and storage
conditions. Food Chem. 138, 1510e1514.
George, N., Clark, A.C., Prenzier, P.D., Scollary, G.R., 2006. Factors
influencing the production and stability of xanthylium cation pigments in a model white wine system. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res.
12, 57e68.

Gerbaux, V., Briffox, C., Dumont, A., Krieger, S., 2009. Influence of inoculation with malolactic bacteria on volatile phenols in wines. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 60, 233e235.
Gerbaux, V., Villa, A., Monamy, C., Bertrand, A., 1997. Use of lysozyme
to inhibit malolactic fermentation and to stabilize wine after malolactic fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 48, 49e54.
Gerland, C., Gerbaux, V., 1999. Sélection d’une nouvelle souche de
bactérie lactique: performances et impacts sur la qualité des vins.
Rev. OEnolog. 93, 17e19.
Gervais, J.-A., 1820. Opuscule sur la vinification. J.-C. Tournel. France,
Montpellier.
Gil-Muñoz, R., Moreno-Pérez, A., Vila-López, R., Fernández
Fernández, J.I., Martı́nez-Cutillas, A., Gómez-Plaza, E., 2009. Influence of low temperature prefermentative techniques on chromatic
and phenolic characteristics of Syrah and Cabernet Sauvignon
wines. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 228, 777e788.
Gindreau, E., Dumeau, F., 2005. Activator for malolactic fermentations:
utilisation, and impact on bacterial populations and course of MLF.
Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 502, 84e88.
Gnaegi, F., Aerny, J., Bolay, A., Crettenand, J., 1983. Influence des traitements viticoles antifongiques sur la vinification et la qualité du vin.
Rev. Suisse Vitic. Arboric. Hortic. 15, 243e250.
González-Centeno, M.R., Chira, K., Teissedre, P.-L., 2017. Comparison
between malolactic fermentation container and barrel toasting effects on phenolic, volatile, and sensory profiles of red wines.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 65, 3320e3329.
Gordillo, B., Cejudo-Bastante, M.J., Rodrı́guez-Pulido, F.J., JaraPalacios, M.J., Ramı́rez-Pérez, P., González-Miret, M.L.,
Heredia, F.J., 2014. Impact of adding white pomace to red grapes
on the phenolic composition and color stability of Syrah wines
from a warm climate. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62, 2663e2671.
Gouliamova, D.E., Hennebert, G.L., 1998. Phylogenetic relationships in
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae complex of species. Mycotaxon 66,
337e353.
Grandvalet, C., Coucheney, F., Beltramo, C., Guzzo, J., 2005. CtsR is the
master regulator of stress response gene expression in Oenococcus
oeni. J. Bacteriol. 187, 5614e5623.
Groat, M.L., Ough, C.S., 1978. Effect of particulate matter on fermentation rates and wine quality. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 29, 112e119.
Grossman, M.K., Becker, R., 1984. Investigations on bacterial inhibition
of wine fermentation. Kellerwirtschaft 10, 272e275.
Grossmann, M., Kießling, F., Singer, J., Schoeman, H., Schröder, M.-B.,
von Wallbrunn, C., 2011. Genetically modified wine yeasts and risk
assessment studies covering different steps within the winemaking
process. Ann Microbiol. 61, 103e115.
Guérin, L., Sutter, D.-H., Demois, A., Chereau, M., Trandafir, G., 2009.
Determination of activity profiles of the main commercial enzyme
preparations used in winemaking. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 60, 322e331.
Guerrini, L., Masella, P., Spugnoli, P., Spinelli, S., Calamai, L.,
Parenti, A., 2016. A condenser to recover organic volatile compounds during vinification. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 67, 163e168.
Guillamón, J.M., Barrio, E., Querol, A., 1996. Characterization of wine
yeast strains of the Saccharomyces genus on the basis of molecular
markers: relationships between genetic distance and geographic
or ecological origin. Systematic Appl. Microbiol. 19, 122e132.
Guillaume, C., Delobel, P., Sablayrolles, J.-M., Blondin, B., 2007. Molecular basis of fructose utilization by the wine yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a mutated HXT3 allele enhances fructose fermentation.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 2432e2439.
Guilloux-Benatier, M., 1987. Les souches de bactéries lactiques et les
divers essais d’ensemencement de la fermentation malolactique
en France. Bull. O.I.V. 60, 624e642.
Guilloux-Benatier, M., Guerreau, J., Feuillat, M., 1995. Influence of
initial colloid content on yeast macromolecule production and on
the metabolism of wine microorganisms. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 46,
486e492.

References

Guilloux-Benatier, M., Le Fur, Y., Feuillat, M., 1989. Influence de la
macération pelliculaire sur la fermentiscibilité malolactique des
vins blancs de Bourgogne. Rev. Fr. Oenol. 29, 29e34.
Guilloux-Benatier, M., Le Fur, Y., Feuillat, M., 1998. Influence of fatty
acids on the growth of wine microorganisms Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Oenococcus oeni. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 20, 144e149.
Guilloux-Benatier, M., Son, H.S., Bouhier, S., Feuillat, M., 1993. Activités enzymatiques: glycosidases et peptidase chez Leuconostoc
oenos au cours de la croissance bactérienne. Influence des macromolécules de levures. Vitis 32, 51e57.
Guitart, A., Hernández-Orte, P., Cacho, J., 1997. Effects of maceration
on the amino acid content of Chardonnay musts and wines. Vitis
36, 43e47.
Guymon, J.F., Crowell, E.A., 1977. The nature and cause of cap-liquid
temperature differences during wine fermentation. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 28, 74e78.
Guzzo, J., Cavin, J.F., Divies, C., 1994. Induction of stress proteins in
Leuconostoc oenos to perform direct inoculation of wine. Biotechnol.
Lett. 16, 1189e1194.
Guzzon, R., Poznanski, E., Conterno, L., Vagnoli, P., Krieger-Weber, S.,
Cavazza, A., 2009. Selection of a new highly resistant strain for
malolactic fermentation under difficult conditions. S. Afr. J. Enol.
Vitic. 30, 133e141.
Haag, B., Krieger, S., Hammes, W.P., 1988. Hemmung der Startezkulturen zur Einlertung des biologischen Säurenabbaus durch
Spritzmittelrückstände. Wein Wiss. 43, 261e278.
Hagman, A., Piskur, J., 2015. A study on the fundamental mechanism
and evolutionary driving forces behind aerobic fermentation in
yeast. Plos One 10, e0116942.
Hall, H., Zhou, Q., Qian, M.C., Osborne, J.P., 2017. Impact of yeasts present during prefermentation cold maceration of Pinot noir grapes
on wine volatile aromas. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 68, 81e90.
Hallsworth, J.E., 1998. Ethanol-induced water stress in yeasts.
J. Ferment. Bioeng. 85, 125e137.
Hammond, S.M., Carr, J.C., 1976. The antimicrobial activity of SO2 e
with particular reference to fermented and non-fermented fruit
juices. In: Skinner, F.A., Hugo, W.B. (Eds.), Inhibition and Inactivation of Vegetative Microbes. Academic Press, London, UK,
pp. 89e110.
Hanlin, R.L., Hrmova, M., Harbertson, J.F., Downey, M.O., 2010. Review: condensed tannin and grape cell wall interactions and their
impact on tannin extractability into wine. Aust. J. Grape Wine
Res. 16, 173e188.
Hansen, E.H., Nissen, P., Sommer, P., Nielsen, J.C., Arneborg, N., 2001.
The effect of oxygen on the survival of non-Saccharomyces yeasts
during mixed culture fermentations of grape juice with Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Appl. Microbiol. 91, 541e547.
Harbertson, J.F., Kennedy, J.A., Adams, D.O., 2002. Tannins in skins
and seeds of Cabernet Sauvignon, Syrah, and Pinot noir berries
during ripening. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 53, 54e59.
Hatzidimitriou, E., Bouchilloux, P., Darriet, P., Bugaret, Y., Clerjeau, M.,
Poupot, C., et al., 1996. Incidence d’une protection viticole anticryptogamique utilisant une formulation cuprique sure le nivear de
maturité des raisins et l’arôme variétal des vins de Sauvignon. Bilan
de trois années d’expérimentation. J. Int. Sci. Vigne Vin 30, 133e150.
Hauser, N.C., Fellenberg, K., Gil, R., Bastuck, S., Hoheisel, J.D.,
Jeffries, T.W., 2001. Whole genome analysis of wine yeast strain.
Comparat. Funct. Genomics 2, 60e79.
Hayman, D.C., Monk, P.R., 1982. Starter culture preparation for the induction of malolactic fermentation in wine. Food Technol. Aust. 34
(14), 16e18.
Heard, G.M., Fleet, G.H., 1985. Growth of natural yeast flora during the
fermentation of inoculated wines. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 50,
727e728.

561

Heard, G.M., Fleet, G.H., 1988. The effects of temperature and pH on
the growth of yeast species during the fermentation of grape
juice. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 65, 23e28.
Heatherbell, D., Dicey, M., Goldsworthy, S., Vanhanen, L., 1996. Effect
of prefermentation cold maceration on the composition, color, and
flavor of Pinot Noir wine. In: Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), Proc. 4th Int.
Symp. Cool Climate Vitic. Enol. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station, Geneva, NY, pp. VI-10eVI-17.
Henderson, A., 1824. The History of Ancient and Modern Wines. Baldwin, Craddock & Joy, London.
Henick-Kling, T., 1985. Phage can block malolactic. Wines Vines 69 (6),
55e59.
Henick-Kling, T., 1995. Control of malolactic fermentation in wine: energetics, flavour modification and methods of starter culture
preparation. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 79, S29eS37.
Henick-Kling, T., Acree, T., Gavitt, B.K., Kreiger, S.A., Laurent, M.H.,
1993. Sensory aspects of malolactic fermentation. In: Stockley, C.S.
(Ed.), Proc. 8th Aust. Wine Ind. Tech. Conf. Winetitles, Adelaide,
Australia, pp. 148e152.
Henick-Kling, T., Edinger, W., Daniel, P., Monk, P., 1998. Selective effects of sulfur dioxide and yeast starter culture addition on indigenous yeast populations and sensory characteristics of wine. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 84, 865e876.
Henschke, P.A., Jiranek, V., 1993. Yeasts e metabolism of nitrogen
compounds. In: Fleet, G.H. (Ed.), Wine Microbiology and
Biotechnology.
Harwood
Academic,
Chur,
Switzerland,
pp. 77e165.
Henschke, P.A., Ough, C.S., 1991. Urea accumulation in fermenting
grape juice. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 42, 317e321.
Hernández-Jiménez, A., Kennedy, J.A., Bautista-Ortı́n, A.B., Gómez
Plaza, E., 2012. Effect of ethanol on grape seed proanthocyanin
extraction. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 63, 57e61.
Hernández-Orte, P., Cersosimo, M., Loscos, N., Cacho, J., Garcia
Moruno, E., Ferreira, V., 2008. The development of varietal aroma
from non-floral grapes by yeasts of different genera. Food Chem.
107, 1064e1077.
Herraiz, T., Guillermo, R., Herraiz, M., Martin-Alvarez, P.J.,
Cabezudo, M.D., 1990. The influence of the yeast and type of culture on the volatile composition of wines fermented without sulfur
dioxide. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 41, 313e318.
Hess, B., Boiteux, A., Krüger, J., 1969. Cooperation of glycolytic
enzymes. Adv. Enzyme Regulation 7, 149e167.
Holloway, P., Subden, R.E., Lachance, M.A., 1990. The yeasts in a Riesling must from the Niagara grape-growing region of Ontario. Can.
Inst. Food Sci. Tech. J. 23, 212e216.
Holt, S., Cordente, A.G., Williams, S.J., Capone, D.L., Jitjaroen, W.,
Menz, I.R., et al., 2011. Engineering Saccharomyces cerevisiae to
release 3-mercaptohexan-1-ol during fermentation through overexpression of an S. cerevisiae gene, STR3, for improvement of wine
aroma. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 3626e3632.
Hottiger, T., de Virigilio, C., Hall, M., Boller, T., Wiemken, A., 1994. The
role of trehalose synthesis for the acquisition of thermotolerance in
yeast, II. Physiological Concentration of Trehalose Increases the
Thermal Stability of Protein in vitro. Eur. J. Biochem. 210,
4766e4744.
Houghton, J., 1699e1700. A Collection for the Improvement of Husbandry and Trade, vol. II, p. 311. #391, 479; #394, 484e5 (cited in
Younger, 1966.
Houtman, A.C., du Plessis, C.S., 1981. The effect of juice clarity and
several conditions promoting yeast growth on fermentation rate,
the production of aroma components and wine quality. S. Afr. J.
Enol. Vitic. 2, 71e81.
Houtman, A.C., du Plessis, C.S., 1985. Influence du cépage et de la
souche de levure. Bull. O.I.V. 58, 236e246.

562

7. Fermentation

Houtman, A.C., du Plessis, C.S., 1986. Nutritional deficiencies of clarified white grape juices and their correction in relation to fermentation. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 7, 39e46.
Houtman, A.C., Marais, J., du Plessis, C.S., 1980. Factors affecting the
reproducibility of fermentation of grape juice and of the aroma
composition of wines, I. Grape maturity, sugar, inoculum concentration, aeration, juice turbidity and ergosterol. Vitis 19, 37e84.
Howell, K.S., Swiegers, J.H., Elsey, G.M., Siebert, T.E., Bartowsky, E.J.,
Fleet, G.H., et al., 2004. Variation in 4-mercapto-4-methyl-pentan-2one release by Saccharomyces cerevisiae commercial wine strains.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 240, 125e129.
Hsu, H.-Y., Tsai, Y.-C., Fu, C.-C., Wu, J.S.-B., 2012. Degradation of ascorbic acid in ethanolic solutions. J. Agric. Food Chem. 60,
10696e10701.
Huang, Y.-C., Edwards, C.G., Peterson, J.C., Haag, K.M., 1996. Relationship between sluggish fermentations and the antagonism of
yeast by lactic acid bacteria. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 47, 1e10.
Husnik, J.I., Delaquis, P.J., Cliff, M.A., van Vuuren, H.J.J., 2007. Functional analyses of the malolactic wine yeast ML01. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 58, 42e52.
Hyma, K.E., Saerens, S.M., Verstrepen, K.J., Fay, J.C., 2011. Divergence
in wine characteristics produced by wild and domesticated strains
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Yeast Res. 11, 540e551.
Iconomou, L., Kanellaki, M., Voliotis, S., Agelopoulos, K.,
Koutinas, A.A., 1996. Continuous wine making by delignified cellulosic materials supported biocatalyst e an attractive process for industrial applications. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 60, 303e313.
Ihmels, J., Bergmann, S., Gerami-Nejad, M., Yanai, I., McClellan, M.,
Berman, J., et al., 2005. Rewiring of the yeast transcriptional
network through the evolution of motif usage. Science 309,
938e940.
Iwahashi, H., Obuchi, K., Fujii, S., Komatsu, Y., 1995. The correlative
evidence suggesting that trehalose stabilizes membrane structure
in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Cell. Molec. Biol. 41, 763e769.
Iwahashi, H., Shimizu, H., Odani, M., Komatsu, Y., 2003. Piezophysiology of genome wine gene expression levels in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Extremophiles 7, 291e298.
Izquierdo, P.M., Garcia, E., Martı́nez, J., Chacón, J.L., 2004. Selection of
lactic bacteria to induce malolactic fermentation in red wine of cv.
Cencibel. Vitis 43, 149e153.
Jacobs, C.J., van Vuuren, H.J.J., 1991. Effects of different killer yeasts on
wine fermentations. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 42, 295e300.
Javelot, C., Girard, P., Colonna-Ceccaldi, B., Valdescu, B., 1991. Introduction of terpene-producing ability in a wine strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biotechnol. 21, 239e252.
Jiranek, V., Langridge, P., Henschke, P.A., 1995. Regulation of hydrogen
sulfide liberation in wine-producing Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
by assimilable nitrogen. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61, 461e467.
Jolly, N.P., Augustyn, O.P.H., Pretorius, I.S., 2003. The use of Candida
pulcherrima in combination with Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the production of Chenin blanc wine. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 24, 63e69.
Jones, R.P., Ough, C.S., 1985. Variations in the percent ethanol (v/v) per
Brix conversions of wines from different climatic regions. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 36, 268e270.
Jones, R.P., Pamment, N., Greenfield, P.F., 1981. Alcohol fermentation
by yeasts e the effect of environmental and other variables. Process
Biochem. 16, 42e49.
Julien, A., Roustan, J.-L., Dulau, L., Sablayrolles, J.-M., 2000. Comparison of nitrogen and oxygen demands of enological yeasts: technological consequences. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 51, 215e222.
Jullien, A., 1817. In: Colas, L. (Ed.), Manuel du Sommelier ou Instruction Practique sur la Manière de Soigner les Vins, 2eme ed. (Paris).
Jussier, D., Morneau, A.D., Mira de Orduña, R., 2006. Effect of simultaneous inoculation with yeast and bacteria on fermentation kinetics
and key wine parameters of cool-climate Chardonnay. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 221e227.

Khan, W., Augustyn, O.P.H., van der Westhuizen, T.J.,
Lambrechts, M.G., Pretorius, I.S., 2000. Geographic distribution
and evaluation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains isolated from vineyards in the warmer, inland regions of the Western Cape in South
Africa. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 21, 17e31.
Killian, E., Ough, C.S., 1979. Fermentation esters e formation and
retention as affected by fermentation temperature. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 30, 301e305.
King, E.S., Kievit, R.L., Curtin, C., Swiegers, J.H., Pretorius, I.S.,
Bastian, S.E.P., et al., 2010. The effect of multiple yeasts coinoculations on Sauvignon Blanc wine aroma composition, sensory
properties and consumer preference. Food Chem. 122, 618e626.
King, E.S., Francis, I.L., Swiegers, J.H., Curtin, C., 2011. Yeast strain
derived sensory differences retained in Sauvignon blanc wine aster
extended bottle storage. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 62, 366e370.
King, S.W., Beelman, R.B., 1986. Metabolic interactions between Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Leuconostoc oenos in a model grape juice/wine
system. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 37, 53e60.
Kioroglou, D., Leixá, J.L., Mas, A., Portillo, M.C., 2018. Massive
sequencing: a new tool for the control of alcoholic fermentation in
wine? Fermentation 4, 7.
Kitamoto, K., 1989. Role of yeast vacuole in sake brewing (in Japanese).
J. Brew. Soc. Japan 84, 367e374.
Klingshirn, L.M., Liu, J.R., Gallander, J.F., 1987. Higher alcohol formation in wines as related to the particle size profiles of juice insoluble
solids. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 38, 207e209.
Kontoudakis, N., Esteruelas, M., Fort, F., Canals, J.M., Zamora, F., 2011.
Use of unripe grapes harvested during cluster thinning as a method
for reducing alcohol content and pH of wine. Aust. J. Grape Wine
Res. 17, 230e238.
Kosseva, M.R., Kennedy, J.F., 2004. Encapsulated lactic acid bacteria for
control of malolactic fermentation in wine. Artif. Cells Blood Substit
Biotechnol. 32, 55e65.
Kotseridis, Y., Beloqui, A.A., Bayonove, C.L., Baumes, R.L.,
Bertrand, A., 1999. Effects of selected viticultural and enological
factors on levels of 2-methoxy-3-isobutylpyrazine in wines. J. Int.
Sci. Vigne Vin 33, 19e23.
Koyama, K., Goto-Yamamoto, N., Hashizume, K., 2007. Influence of
maceration temperature in red wine vinification on extraction of
phenolics from berry skins and seeds of grape (Vitis vinifera). Biosci.
Biotechnol. Biochem. 71, 958e965.
Kraus, J.K., Scoop, R., Chen, S.L., 1981. Effect of rehydration on dry
wine yeast activity. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 32, 132e134.
Kreger-van Rij, N.J.W. (Ed.), 1984. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, third
ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Krieger, S., Lemperle, E., Ernst, M., 2000. Management of malolactic
fermentation with regard to flavour modification in wine. In:
Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Cool. Clim. Viti. Oenol.. Melbourne, Australia.
Krieger-Weber, S., 2009. Application of yeast and bacteria as starter
cultures. In: König, H., Unden, G., Fröhlich, J. (Eds.), Biology of Microorganisms on Grapes, in Must and in Wine. Springer, New York,
NY, pp. 489e511.
Krisch, J., Szajáni, B., 1997. Ethanol and acetic acid tolerance in free and
immobilized cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Acetobacter aceti.
Biotechnol. Lett. 19, 525e528.
Kruckeberg, A.L., 1996. The hexose transporter family of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Arch. Microbiol. 166, 283e292.
Kudo, M., Vagnoli, P., Bisson, L.F., 1998. Imbalance of pH and potassium concentration as a cause of stuck fermentations. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 49, 295e301.
Kuehne, H.A., Murphy, H.A., Francis, C.A., Sniegowski, P.D., 2007.
Allopatric divergence, secondary contact, and genetic isolation in
wild yeast populations. Curr. Biol. 17, 407e411.
Kunkee, R.E., Ough, C.S., 1966. Multiplication and fermentation of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae under carbon dioxide pressure in wine.
Appl. Microbiol. 14, 643e648.

References

Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W. (Eds.), 1998. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study,
fourth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T. (Eds.), 2011. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, fifth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Kutyna, D.R., Varela, C., Henschke, P.A., Chambers, P.J., Stanley, G.A.,
2010. Microbiological approaches to lowering ethanol concentration in wine. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 21, 293e302.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., 1975. Factors of the malolactic fermentation of
wines. In: Carr, J.G. (Ed.), Lactic Acid Bacteria in Food and
Beverages. Academic Press, London, pp. 43e53.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., 1980. Les origins microbiologiques de l’acidité
volatile des vins. Microbiol. Ind. Aliment. Ann. Congr. Intl. 2,
33e48.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., 1981. Connaissances actuelles, dans la maı̂trise
de la fermentation malolactique dans les moûts et les vins. In:
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Sudraud, P. (Eds.), Actualités Oenologiques
et Viticoles. Dunod, Paris, pp. 243e251.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Carre, E., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1983. Occurrence
of lactic acid bacteria during different stages of vinification and
conservation of wines. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 46, 874e880.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Geneix, C., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1984. Inhibition
of alcoholic fermentation of grape must by fatty acids produced
by yeasts and their elimination by yeast ghosts. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 47, 1246e1249.
Lagunas, R., 1986. Misconceptions about the energy metabolism of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 2, 221e228.
Languet, P., Ortiz-Julien, A., Aguera, E., Samson, A., Salmon, J.M.,
2005. Valorisation aromatique des moûts par l’utilisation séquentielle de levure d’espèces non-Saccharomyces et Saccharomyces. Rev.
Oenol. 117, 31e33.
Lao, C.L., López-Tamames, E., Lamuela-Raventós, R.M., Buxaderas, S.,
De la Torre-Boronat, M.C., 1997. Pectic enzyme treatment effects on
quality of white grape musts and wines. J. Food Sci. 62, 1142e1144,
1149.
Larcher, R., Nicolini, G., Tonibandel, L., Román Villegas, T.,
Malacarne, M., Fedrizzi, B., 2013. Influence of oxygen availability
during skin-contact maceration on the formation of precursors of
3-mercaptohexan-1-ol in Müller-Thurgau and Sauvignon Blanc
grapes. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 19, 342e348.
Larsen, J.T., Nielsen, J.C., Kramp, B., Richelieu, M., Bjerring, P.,
Riisager, M.J., et al., 2003. Impact of different strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae on malolactic fermentation by Oenococcus oeni.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 54, 246e251.
Lawless, H.T., Rapacki, F., Horne, J., Hayes, A., 2003. The taste of calcium and magnesium salts and anionic modifications. Food Qual.
Pref. 14, 319e325.
Laurent, M.H., Henick-Kling, T., Acree, T.E., 1994. Changes in the
aroma and odor of Chardonnay due to malolactic fermentation.
Wein Wiss 49, 3e10.
Lee, C.Y., Robinson, W.B., Van Buren, J.P., Acree, T.E., Stoewsand, G.S.,
1975. Methanol in wines in relation to processing and variety. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 26, 184e187.
Lehmann, F.L., 1987. Secondary fermentations retarded by high levels
of free sulfur dioxide. Aust. NZ Wine Ind. J. 2, 52e53.
Lemperle, E., 1988. Fungicide residues in musts and wines. In:
Smart, R.E. (Ed.), IProc. 2nd Int. Symp Cool Climate Vitic. Oenol.
New Zealand Society for Viticulture and Oenology, Auckland,
New Zealand, pp. 211e218.
Lerno, L.A., Panprivech, S., Ponangi, R., Hearne, L., Blair, T.,
Oberholster, A., Block, D.E., 2018. Effect of pump-over conditions
on the extraction of phenolic compounds during Cabernet Sauvignon fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 69, 295e301.
Lezaeta, A., Bordeu, E., Agosin, E., Pérez-Correa, J.R., Varela, P., 2018.
White wines aroma recovery and enrichment: sensory-led aroma
selection and consumer perception. Food Res. Int. 108, 595e603.

563

Libkind, D., Hittinger, C.T., Valério, E., Gonçalves, C., Dover, J.,
Johnston, M., et al., 2011. Microbe domestication and the identification of the wild genetic stock of lager-brewing yeast. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 108, 14539e14544.
Li, H., Du, G., Li, H.-L., Wang, H.-L., Yan, G.-L., Zhan, J.-C., et al., 2010.
Physiological response of different wine yeasts to hyperosmotic
stress. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 61, 529e535.
Li, J., Zhao, H., Huang, W., 2014. Mechanism of proanthocyanidinsinduced alcoholic fermentation enhancement in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41, 1793e1802.
Liu, S.-Q., Pilone, G.J., 1998. A review: arginine metabolism in wine lactic acid bacteria and its practical significance. J. Appl. Microbiol. 84,
315e327.
Liu, S.-Q., Davis, C.R., Brooks, J.D., 1995. Growth and metabolism of
selected lactic acid bacteria in synthetic wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
46, 166e174.
Llauradó, J.M., Rozes, N., Constanti, M., Mas, A., 2005. Study of some
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains for winemaking after preadaptation
at low temperatures. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 1003e1011.
Longo, R., Blackman, J.W., Antalick, G., Torley, P.J., Rogiers, S.Y.,
Schmidtke, L.M., 2018. Harvesting and blending options for lower
alcohol wines: a sensory and chemical investigation. J. Sci. Food
Agric. 98, 33e42.
Lopez, N., Puertolas, E., Condon, S., Alvarez, I., Raso, J., 2008. Application of pulsed electric fields for improving the maceration process
during vinification of red wine: influence of grape variety. Eur.
Food Res. Technol. 227, 1099e1107.
Lopez, R., Santamaria, P., Gutierrez, A.R., Iñiguez, M., 1996. Changes in
amino acids during the alcoholic fermentation of grape juice at
different temperatures. Sci. Aliments 16, 529e535.
López-Rituerto, E., Cabredo, S., López, M., Avenoza, A., Busto, J.H.,
Peregrina, J.M., 2009. A thorough study on the use of quantitative
1H NMR in Rioja red wine fermentation processes. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 57, 2112e2118.
Lorenzo, C., Pardo, F., Zalacain, A., Alonzo, G.L., Salinas, M.R., 2005.
Effect of red grapes co-winemaking in polyphenols and color of
wines. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 7609e7616.
Louw, C., La Grange, D., Pretorius, I.S., van Rensburg, P., 2006. Effect of
polysaccharide-degrading wine yeast transformants on the efficiency of wine processing and wine flavor. J. Biotechnol. 125,
447e461.
Lucero, P., Penalver, E., Moreno, E., Lagunas, R., 2000. Internal trehalose protects endocytosis from inhibition by ethanol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 4456e4461.
Magliani, W., Conti, S., Gerloni, M., Bertolotti, D., Polonelli, L., 1997.
Yeast killer systems. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 10, 369e400.
Maicas, S., Natividad, A., Ferrer, S., Pardo, I., 2000. Malolactic fermentation in wine with high densities of non-proliferating Oenococcus
oeni. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 16, 805e810.
Maicas, S., Pardo, I., Ferrer, S., 2001. The potential of positively charged
cellulose sponge for malolactic fermentation of wine, using Oenococcus oeni. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 28, 415e419.
Maitre, M., Weidmann, S., Dubois-Brissonnet, F., David, V., Covès, J.,
Guzzo, J., 2014. Adaptation of the wine bacterium Oenococcus oeni
to ethanol stress: role of the small heat shock protein Lo18 in membrane integrity. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 2973e2980.
Malherbe, S., Menichelli, E., du Toit, M., Tredoux, A., Muller, N.,
Næs, T., Nieuwoudt, H., 2013. The relationships between consumer
liking, sensory and chemical attributes of Vitis vinifera L. cv. Pinotage wines elaborated with different Oenococcus oeni starter
cultures. J. Sci. Food Agric. 93, 2829e2840.
Majdak, A., Herjavec, S., Orlic, S., Redzepovic, S., Mirosevic, N., 2002.
Comparison of wine aroma compounds produced by Saccharomyces
paradoxus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. Food Technol. Biotechnol. 40, 103e109.

564

7. Fermentation

Manca de Nadra, M.C.M., Farı́as, M.E., Moreno-Arribas, M.V.,
Pueyo, E., Polo, M.C., 1999. A proteolytic activity of Oenococcus
oeni on nitrogenous macromolecular fraction of red wine. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 174, 41e47.
Mencarelli, F., Tonutti, P. (Eds.), 2013. Sweet, Reinforced and Fortified
Wines: Grape Biochemistry, Technology and Vinification. WileyBlackwell, UK.
Mangelsdorf, P.C., 1974. Corn: Its Origin, Evolution and Improvement.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Mass Marais, J., 1987. Terpene concentrations and wine quality of Vitis
vinifera L. cv. Gewürztraminer as affected by grape maturity and
cellar practices. Vitis 26, 231e245.
Manns, D.C., Lenerz, C.T.M., Mansfield, A.K., 2013. Impact of processing parameters on the phenolic profile of wine produced from
hygrid red grapes Maréchanl Foch, Corot noir, and Marquette.
J. Food Sci. 78, C696eC702.
Maqueda, M., Zamora, E., Álvarez, M.L., Ramı́rez, M., 2012. Characterization, ecological distribution, and population dynamics of Saccharomyces sensu stricto killer yeasts in the spontaneous grape must
fermentations of southwestern Spain. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
78, 735e743.
Marais, J., 1996. Fruit environment and prefermentation practices for
manipulation of monoterpene, norisoprenoid and pyrazine
flavorants. In: Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool
Climate Vitic. Enol. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station, Geneva, NY, pp. V-40eV-48.
Marais, J., van Wyk, C.J., 1986. Effect of grape maturity and juice
treatments on terpene concentrations and wine quality of Vitis
vinifera L. cv. Weisser Riesling and Bukettraube. S. Afr. J. Enol.
Vitic. 7, 26e35.
Marchal, A., Marullo, P., Durand, C., Moine, V., Dubourdieu, D., 2015.
Fermentative conditions modulating sweetness in dry wines: genetics and environmental factors influencing the expression level
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae HSP12 gene. J. Agric. Food Chem.
63, 304e311.
Marsit, S., Dequin, S., 2015. Diversity and adaptive evolution of Saccharomyces wine yeasts: a review. FEMS Yeast Res. 15 (7) fov067.
https://doi.org/10.1093/femsyr/fov067.
Martineau, B., Henick-Kling, T., 1995. Performance and diacetyl production of commercial strains of malolactic bacteria in wine.
J. Appl. Bacteriol. 78, 526e536.
Martı́nez, J., Millán, C., Ortega, J.M., 1989. Growth of natural flora during the fermentation of inoculated musts from Pedro Ximenez
Grapes. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 10, 31e35.
Martins, N., Garcia, R., Mendes, D., Freitas, A.M.C., da Silva, M.G.,
Cabrita, M.J., 2018. An ancient winemaking technology: exploring
the volatile composition of amphora wines. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 96, 288e295.
Martorell, P., Querol, A., Fernández-Espinar, M.T., 2005. Rapid
identification and enumeration of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells
in wine by real-time PCR. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71,
6823e6830.
Marullo, P., Bely, M., Masneuf-Pomarede, I., Aigle, M., Dubourdieu, D.,
2004. Inheritable nature of enological quantitative traits is demonstrated by meiotic segregation of industrial wine yeast strains.
FEMS Yeast Res. 4, 711e719.
Masneuf-Pomarède, I., Mansour, C., Murat, M.-L., Tominaga, T.,
Dubourdieu, D., 2006. Influence of fermentation temperature on
volatile thiols concentrations in Sauvignon blanc wines. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 108, 385e390.
Massoutier, C., Alexandre, H., Feuillat, M., Charpentier, C., 1998. Isolation and characterization of cryotolerant Saccharomyces strains. Vitis
37, 55e59.
Mateo, J.J., Jimenez, M., 2000. Monoterpenes in grape juice and wines.
J. Chromatography A 881, 557e567.

Mateo, J.J., Jimenez, M., Huerta, T., Pastor, A., 1991. Contribution of
different yeast isolated from musts of Monastrell grapes to the
aroma of wine. Intl. J. Food Microbiol. 14, 153e160.
Matthews, A., Grbin, P.R., Jiranek, V., 2007. Biochemical characterization of the esterase activities of wine lactic acid bacteria. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77, 329e337.
Maturano, Y.P., Mestre, M.V., Esteve-Sarzoso, B., Nally, M.C.,
Lerena, M.C., Toro, M.E., et al., 2015. Yeast population dynamics
during prefermentative cold soak of cabernet Sauvignon and Malbec wines. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 199, 25e32.
Mayer, K., 1974. Mikrobiologisch und kellertechnisch wichtige neue
Erkenntnisse in bezug auf den biologischen Säureabbau. Schweiz.
Z. Obst.Weinbau. 110, 291e297.
McBryde, C., Gardner, J.M., de Barros Lopes, M., Jiranek, V., 2006. Generation of novel wine yeast strains by adaptive evolution. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 57, 423e430.
Medina, K., Boido, E., Dellacassa, E., Carrau, F., 2005. Yeast interactions
with anthocyanins during red wine fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
56, 104e109.
Medina, K., Boido, E., Fariña, L., Bioia, O., Gomez, M.E., Barquet, M.,
et al., 2013. Increased flavour diversity of Chardonnay wines by
spontaneous fermentation and co-fermentation with Hanseniaspora
vineae. Food Chem. 141, 2513e2521.
Mendes-Ferreira, A., Climaco, M.C., Mendes-Faia, A., 2001. The role of
non-Saccharomyces species in releasing glycosidic bound fraction of
grap aroma components e a preliminary study. J. Appl. Microbiol.
91, 67e71.
Mendes-Ferreira, A., del Olmo, M., Garcı́a-Martı́nez, J., Jiménez
Martı́, E., Leão, C., Mendes-Faia, A., et al., 2007. Saccharomyces cerevisiae signature genes for predicting nitrogen deficiency during
alcoholic fermentation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 5363e5369.
Meyrath, J., Lüthi, H.R., 1969. On the metabolism of hexoses and pentoses by Leuconostoc isolated from wines and fruit. Lebensm. Wiss.
Technol. 2, 22e27.
Michelet, E., Celotti, E., Branca, G., 2004. Fermentative capacity of some
yeast strains at low temperatures. Aust. N. Z. Grapegrower Winemaker 490, 102e105.
Michnick, S., Roustan, J.-L., Remize, F., Barre, P., Dequin, S., 1997. Modulation of glycerol and ethanol yields during alcoholic fermentation
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains overexpressed or disrupted for
GPD1 encoding glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Yeast 13,
783e793.
Mietton-Peuchot, M., Milisic, V., Noilet, P., 2002. Grape must concentration by using reverse osmosis. Comparison with
chaptalization. Desalination 148, 125e129.
Mihnea, M., González-SanJosé, M.L., Ortega-Heras, M., Pérez
Magariño, S., Garcı́a-Martin, N., Palacio, L., et al., 2012. Impact of
must sugar reduction by membrane applications on volatile
composition of Verdejo wines. J. Agric. Food Chem. 60, 7050e7063.
Miller, G.C., Amon, J.M., Simpson, R.F., 1987. Loss of aroma compounds in carbon dioxide effluent during white wine
fermentation. Food Technol. Aust. 39, 246e253.
Millet, V., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2000. The viable but non-culturable state
of wine microorganisms during storage. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 30,
136e141.
Mills, D.A., Rawsthorne, H., Parker, C., Tamir, D., Makarova, K., 2005.
Genomic analysis of Oenococcus oeni PSU-1 and its relevance to
winemaking. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 29, 465e475.
Minárik, E., Rágala, P., 1966. Einfluß einiger Fungizide auf die Hefeflora bei der spotanen Mostgärung. Mitt. Rebe Wein, Obstbau
Früchteverwert. (Klosterneuburg) 16, 107e114.
Mira de Orduña, R.M., Patchett, M.L., Liu, S.-Q., Pilone, G.J., 2001. Growth
and arginine metabolism of the wine lactic acid bacteria Lactobacillus
buchneri and Oenococcus oeni at different pH values and arginine
concentrations. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 1657e1662.

References

Mizoguchi, H., Hara, S., 1998. Permeability barrier of the yeast plasma
membrane induced by ethanol. J. Ferm. Bioeng. 85, 25e29.
Moio, L., Ugliano, M., Gambuti, A., Genovese, A., Piombino, P.,
2004. Influence of clarification treatment on concentrations of
selected free varietal aroma compounds and glycoconjugates in
Falanghina (Vitis vinifera L.) must and wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
55, 7e12.
Mora, J., Mulet, A., 1991. Effects of some treatments of grape juice on
the population and growth of yeast species during fermentation.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 42, 133e136.
Morakul, S., Mouret, J.-R., Nicolle, P., Aguera, E., Sablayrolles, J.-M.,
Athès, V., 2013. A dynamic analysis of higher alcohol and ester
release during winemaking fermentations. Food Process Technol.
6, 818e827.
Morata, A., Gomez-Cordoves, M.C., Calderon, F., Suarez, J.A., 2006. Effects of pH, temperature and SO2 on the formation of pyranoanthocyanins during red wine fermentation with two species of
Saccharomyces. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 106, 123e129.
Morata, A., González, C., Suárez-Lepe, J.A., 2007. Formation of vinylphenolic pyranoanthocyanins by selected yeasts fermenting red
grape musts supplemented with hydroxycinnamic acids. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 116, 144e152.
Mortimer, R., Polsinelli, M., 1999. On the origins of wine yeast. Res.
Microbiol. 150, 199e204.
Munoz, E., Ingledew, W.M., 1990. Yeast hulls in wine fermentations, a
review. J. Wine Res. 1, 197e209.
Murat, M.-L., 2005. Recent findings on rosé wine aromas. Part I: identifying aromas studying the aromatic potential of grapes and juice.
Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 497a, 64e65, 69, 71, 73e74, 76.
Murat, M.-L., Dumeau, F., 2005. Recent findings on rosé wine aromas.
Part II: optimizing winemaking techniques. Aust. NZ Grapegrower
Winemaker 499 (49e52), 54e55.
Murat, M.L., Tominaga, T., Dubourdieu, D., 2001. Assessing the aromatic potential of Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot must used to
produce rosé wine by assaying the cysteinylated precursor of 3mercaptohexan-1-ol. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49, 5412e5417.
Nagel, C.W., Weller, K., Filiatreau, D., 1988. Adjustment of high pHhigh TA musts and wines. In: Smart, R.E. (Ed.), Proc. 2nd Int.
Symp Cool Climate Vitic. Oenol. New Zealand Society for Viticulture and Oenology, Auckland, New Zealand, pp. 222e224.
Naumova, E.S., Naumov, G.I., Masneuf-Pomarede, I., Aigle, M.,
Dubourdieu, D., 2005. Molecular genetic study of introgression
between Saccharomyces bayanus and S. cerevisiae. Yeast 22,
1099e1115.
Navarro, S., Barba, A., Oliva, J., Navarro, G., Pardo, F., 1999. Evolution
of residual levels of six pesticides during elaboration of red wines.
Effect of wine making procedures in their disappearance. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 47, 264e270.
Nicolini, G., Moser, S., Mazzi, E., Larcher, R., 2011. Effect of juice
turbidity on fermentative volatile compounds in white wines. Vitis
50, 131e135.
Nielsen, J.C., Richelieu, M., 1999. Control of flavor development in
wine during and after malolactic fermentation by Oenococcus oeni.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 740e745.
Nikolantonaki, M., Darriet, P., 2011. Identification of ethyl 2- sulfanylacetate as an important off-odor compound in white wines. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 59, 10191e10199.
Nikolantonaki, M., Chichuc, I., Teissedre, P.-L., Darriet, P., 2010. Reactivity of volatile thiols with polyphenols in a wine-model medium:
impact of oxygen, iron, and sulfur dioxide. Anal. Chim. Acta 660,
102e109.
Nilov, V.I., Valuiko, G.G., 1958. Changes in nitrogen during fermentation (in Russian). Vinodel. Vinograd. S.S.S.R 18, 4e7.
Nishino, H., Miyazakim, S., Tohjo, K., 1985. Effect of osmotic pressure
on the growth rate and fermentation activity of wine yeasts. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 36, 170e174.

565

Nissen, T.L., Hahmann, C.W., Kielland-Brandt, M.C., Nielsen, J.,
Villadsen, J., 2000. Anaerobic and aerobic batch cultivations of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants impaired in glycerol production.
Yeast 16, 463e474.
Nissen, P., Nielsen, D., Arneboug, N., 2004. The relative glucose uptake
abilities of non-Saccharomyces yeasts play a role in their coexistence
with Saccharomyces cerevisiae in mixed cultures. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 64, 543e550.
Nygaard, M., Prahl, C., 1996. Compatibility between strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Leuconostoc oenos as an important factor for
successful malolactic fermentation. In: Henick Kling, T. (Ed.),
Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool Climate Vitic. Enol. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station, Geneva, NY, pp. VI-103eVI-106.
Nykänen, L., 1986. Formation and occurrence of flavor compounds in
wine and distilled alcoholic beverages. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 37, 89e96.
Obanor, F.O., Williamson, K., Mundy, D.C., Wood, P.N., Walter, M.,
2004. Optimisation of PTA-ELISA detection and quantification of
Botrytis cinerea infections in grapes. NZ Plant Protect. 57, 130e137.
Ocón, E., Gutiérrez, A.R., Garijo, P., López, R., Santamarı́a, P., 2010.
Presence of non-Saccharomyces yeasts in cellar equipment and grape
juice during harvest time. Food Microbiol. 27, 1023e1027.
Ohkuni, K., Hayashi, M., Yamashita, I., 1998. Bicarbonate-mediated social communication stimulates meiosis and sporulation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 14, 623e631.
O’Kennedy, K., Canal-Llaubères, R.-M., 2013a. The AeZ of wine enzymes: Part 1. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 589, 57e61.
O’Kennedy, K., Canal-Llaubères, R.-M., 2013b. The AeZ of wine enzymes: Part 2. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 590, 42e46.
O’Kennedy, K., Reid, G., 2008. Yeast nutrient management in
winemaking. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 537 (92), 94e100.
Olejar, K.J., Fedrizzi, B., Kilmartin, P.A., 2015. Antioxidant activity and
phenolic profiles of Sauvignon Blanc wine made by various maceration techniques. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 21, 57e68.
Olguı́n, N., Bordons, A., Reguant, C., 2009. Influence of ethanol and pH
on the gene expression of the citrate pathway in Oenococcus oeni.
Food Microbiol. 26, 197e203.
Ollivier, C., Stonestreet, T., Larue, F., Dubourdieu, D., 1987. Incidence
de la composition colloidale des moûts blancs sur leur
fermentescibilité. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 21, 59e70.
Orlic, S., Redzepovic, S., Jeromel, A., Herjavec, S., Iacumin, L., 2007. Influence of indigenous Saccharomyces paradoxus strains on Chardonnay wine fermentation aroma. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 42,
95e101.
Orlic, S., Arroyo-López, F.N., Huic-Balic, K., Lucilla, I., Querol, A.,
Barrio, E., 2010. A comparative study of the wine fermentation performance of Saccharomyces paradoxus under different nitrogen concentrations and glucose/fructose ratios. J. Appl. Microbiol. 108,
73e80.
Osborne, J.P., Edwards, C.G., 2007. Inhibition of malolactic fermentation by a peptide produced by Saccharomyces cerevisiae during alcoholic fermentation. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 118, 27e34.
Oszmianski, J., Ramos, T., Bourzeix, M., 1988. Fractionation of phenolic
compounds in red wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 39, 259e262.
Ough, C.S., 1966a. Fermentation rates of grape juice, II. Effects of initial
 Brix, pH, and fermentation temperature. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 17, 20e26.
Ough, C.S., 1966b. Fermentation rates of grape juice, III. Effects of
initial ethyl alcohol, pH, and fermentation temperature. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 17, 74e81.
Ough, C.S., Trioli, G., 1988. Urea removal from wine by an acid urease.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 39, 303e306.
Ough, C.S., Stevens, D., Sendovski, T., Huang, Z., An, A., 1990. Factors
contributing to urea formation in commercially fermented wines.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 41, 68e73.
Pampulha, M.A., Loureiro-Dias, M.C., 1990. Activity of glycolytic enzymes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the presence of acetic acid.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 34, 375e380.

566

7. Fermentation

Park, S.K., Morrison, J.C., Adams, D.O., Noble, A.C., 1991. Distribution
of free and glycosidically bound monoterpenes in the skin and
mesocarp of Muscat of Alexandria grape during development.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 39, 514e518.
Parsel, D.A., Kowal, A.S., Singer, M.A., Lindquist, S., 1994. Protein
disaggregation mediated by heat-shock protein HSP104. Nature
372, 475e478.
Patel, P., Herbst-Johnstone, M., Lee, S.A., Gardner, R.C., Weaver, R.,
Nicolau, L., et al., 2010. Influence of juice pressing conditions on
polyphenols, antooxidants, and varietal aroma of Sauvignon blanc
microferments. J. Agric Food Chem. 58, 7280e7288.
Payne, R.W., 1998. Identification of yeasts through computer-based
systems. In: Bridge, P.D. (Ed.), Information Technology: Plant Pathology and Biodiversity. CAB International, Wallingford, UK,
pp. 333e346.
Pedroza, M.A., Carmona, M., Salinas, M.R., Zalacain, A., 2011. Use of
dehydrated waste grape skins as a natural additive for producing
rosé wines: study of extraction conditions and evolution. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 59, 10976e10986.
Peinado, R.A., Moreno, J., Bueno, J.E., Moreno, J.A., Mauricio, J.C.,
2004. Comparative study of aromatic compounds in two young
white wines subjected to pre-fermentative cryomaceration. Food
Chem. 84, 585e590.
Peng, Z., Duncan, B., Pocock, K.F., Sefton, M.A., 1998. The effect of
ascorbic acid on oxidative browning of white wines and model
wines. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 4, 127e135.
Perez, M., Luyten, K., Michel, R., Riou, C., Blondin, B., 2005. Analysis of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae hexose carrier expression during wine
fermentation: both low- and high-affinity Hxt transporters are
expressed. FEMS Yeast Res. 5, 351e361.
Pérez-Magariño, S., Sánchez-Iglesias, M., Ortega-Heras, M., GonzálezHuerta, C., González-Sanjosé, M.L., 2007. Colour stabilization of
red wines by microoxygenation treatment before malolactic
fermentation. Food Chem. 10, 881e893.
Pérez-Ortı́n, J.E., Garcı́a-Martı́nez, J., Alberola, T.M., 2002. DNA chips
for yeast biotechnology. The case of wine yeasts. J. Biotechnol. 98,
227e241.
Pérez-Torrado, R., Querol, A., Guillamón, M., 2015. Genetic improvement of non-GMO wine yeasts: strategies, advantages and safety.
Trends Food Sci. Technol. 45, 1e11.
Peter, J., De Chiara, M., Friedrich, A., Yue, J.-X., Pflieger, D.,
Bergström, A., et al., 2018. Genome evolution across 1,011 Saccharomyces cerevisiae isolates. Nature 556, 339e344.
Petering, J.E., Henschke, P.A., Langridge, P., 1991. The Escherichia coli
b-glucuronidase gene as a marker for Saccharomyces yeast strain
identification. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 42, 6e12.
Petering, J.E., Langridge, P., Hensehke, P.A., 1993. Use of a marked
wine yeast to determine efficiency of sulfur dioxide at low must
temperature. In: Stockley, C.S. (Ed.), Proc. 8th Aust. Wine Ind.
Tech. Conf. Winetitles, Adelaide, Australia, p. 211.
Peyrot des Gachons, C., Kennedy, J.A., 2003. Direct method for determining seed and skin proanthocyanidin extraction in red wines.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 5877e5881.
Pfeiffer, T., Schuster, S., Bonhoeffer, A., 2001. Cooperation and competition in the evolution of ATP-producing pathways. Science 292,
504e507.
Piao, H., Hawley, E., Kopf, S., DeScenzo, R., Sealock, S., HenickKling, T., Hess, M., 2015. Insights into the bacterial community
and its temporal succession during the fermentation of wine
grapes. Front. Microbiol. 6, 1222.
Pickering, G.J., Heatherbell, D.A., Barnes, M.F., 1999. The production of
reduced-alcohol wine using glucose oxidase-treated juice. Part III.
Sensory. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 50, 307e316.
Pilone, G.J., Rankine, B.C., Pilone, A., 1974. Inhibiting malolactic
fermentation in Australian dry red wines by adding fumaric acid.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 25, 99e107.

Pines, O., Shemesh, S., Battat, E., Goldberg, I., 1997. Overexpression of
sytosolic malate dehydrogenase (MDH2) causes overproduction of
specific organic acids in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Microiol.
Biotechnol. 48, 248e255.
Polsinelli, M., Romano, P., Suzzi, G., Mortimer, R., 1996. Multiple
strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae on a single grape vine. Lett.
Appl. Microbiol. 23, 110e114.
Pons, A., Lavigne, V., Darriet, P., Dubourdieu, D., 2015. Glutathione
preservation during winemaking with Vitis vinifera white varieties:
example of Sauvignon blanc grapes. Am. J. Enol Vitic. 66, 187e194.
Prahl, C., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Korsgaard, S., Morrison, E., Joyeux, A.,
1988. Étude d’un nouveau procédé de déclenchement de la fermentation malolactique. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 22, 197e207.
Prévost, H., Cavin, J.F., Lamoureux, M., Diviès, C., 1995. Plasmid and
chromosome characterization of Leuconostoc. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 46,
43e48.
Price, G., 2013. Flash detente an exciting option for winemakers. Aust.
NZ Grapegrower Winemaker. No. 595, ISSN: 1446e8212.
Prior, B.A., Toh, T.A., Jolly, N., Baccari, C., Mortimer, R.K., 2000. Impact
of yeast breeding for elevated glycerol production on fermentative
activity and metabolite formation in Chardonnay wine. S. Afr. J.
Enol. Vitic. 21, 92e98.
Puértolas, E., López, N., Condón, S., Álvarez, I., Raso, J., 2010. Potential
applications of PEF to improve red wine quality. Trends Food Sci.
Technol. 21, 247e255.
Puig, S., Querol, A., Barrio, E., Pérez-Ortı́n, J.E., 2000. Mitotic recombination and genetic changes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae during wine
fermentation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 2057e2061.
du Plessis, C.S., 1983. Influence de la température d’élaboration et de
conservation. Bull. O.I.V. 524, 104e115.
Forbes, R.J., 1957. Food and drink. In: Singer, R.J., Holmyard, E.J.,
Hall, A.R. (Eds.), A History of Technology, vol. II. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, pp. 103e147.
Querol, A., Barrio, E., Huerta, T., Ramón, D., 1992. Molecular monitoring of wine fermentations conducted by active dry yeast
strains. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 58, 2948e2953.
Quirós, M., Rojas, V., Gonzalez, R., Morales, P., 2014. Selection of nonSaccharomyces yeast strains for reducing alcohol levels in wine by
sugar respiration. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 181, 85e91.
Radler, F., 1972. Problematik des bakteriellen Säureabbaus. Weinberg
Keller 19, 357e370.
Radler, F., 1986. Microbial biochemistry. Experientia 42, 884e893.
Radler, F., Fäth, K.P., 1991. Histamine and other biogenic amines in
wines. In: Rantz, J.M. (Ed.), Proc. Int. Symp. Nitrogen in Grapes
and Wine American Society for Enology and Viticulture, Davis,
CA, pp. 185e195.
Radler,
F.,
Yannissis,
C.,
1972.
Weinsäureabbau
bei
Milchsäurebakterien. Arch. Mikrobiol. 82, 219e239.
Ramey, D., Bertrand, A., Ough, C.S., Singleton, V.L., Sanders, E., 1986.
Effects of skin contact temperature on Chardonnay must and wine
composition. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 37, 99e106.
Ramı́rez, M., Peréz, F., Regedón, J.A., 1998. A simple and reliable
method for hybridization of homothallic wine strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 5039e5041.
Ramı́rez, M., Regodón, J.A., Pérez, F., Rebollo, J.E., 1999. Wine yeast
fermentation vigor may be improved by elimination of recessive
growth-retarding alleles. Biotechnol. Bioengin. 65, 212e218.
Ramos, A., Santos, H., 1996. Citrate and sugar cofermentation in Leuconostoc oenos, a 13C nuclear magnetic resonance study. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62, 2577e2585.
Rankine, B.C., 1966. Decomposition of L-malic acid by wine yeasts.
J. Sci. Food Agric. 17, 312e316.
Raschmanová, H., Weninger, A., Glieder, A., Kovar, K., Vogl, T., 2018.
Implementing CRISPR-Cas technologies in conventional and nonconventional yeasts: current state and future prospects. Biotech.
Adv. 36, 641e665.

References

Rapp, A., Reuther, K.H., 1971. Der Gehalt an freien Aminosäuren in
Trabenmosten von gesunden und edelfaulen Beeren verschiedener
Rebsorten. Vitis 10, 51e58.
Rauhut, D., Kürbel, H., 1994. Die Entstehung von H2S aus
Netzschwefel-Rückständen während der Gärung und dessen
Einfluß auf die Bildung von böckserverursachenden schwefelhaltigen Metaboliten in Wein. Wein-Wiss. 29, 27e36.
Raynal, C., Wardrop, F., Pillet, O., Languet, P., Dumont, A., Orti
Julien, A., 2011. An Innovative Tool for The Winemaker: Sequential
Inoculation With a Non-Saccharomyces and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae Yeast. Lallemand Inc., p. 16. http://www.lallemandwine.com/
IMG/pdf_Sequential_en.pdf
Red
zepovic, S., Orlic, S., Sikora, S., Majdak, A., Pretorius, I.S., 2002.
Identification and characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Saccharomyces paradoxus strains isolated from Croatian vineyards.
Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 35, 305e310.
Regodón Mateos, J.A., Pérez-Nevado, F., Ramı́rez-Fernández, M.,
2006. Influence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain on the major
volatile compounds of wine. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 40,
151e157.
Reguant, C., Bordons, A., 2003. Typification of Oenococcus oeni strains
by multiplex RAPD-PCR and study of population dynamics during
malolactic fermentation. J. Appl. Microbiol. 95, 344e353.
Remize, F., Gaudin, A., Kong, Y., Guzzo, J., Alexandre, H., Krieger, S.,
et al., 2006. Oenococcus oeni preference for peptides: qualitative and
quantitative analysis of nitrogen assimilation. Arch. Microbiol. 185,
459e469.
Remize, F., Roustan, J.L., Sablayrolles, J.M., Barre, P., Dequin, S., 1999.
Glycerol overproduction by engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae
wine yeast strains leads to substantial changes in by-product formation and to a stimulation of fermentation rate in stationary
phase. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 143e149.
Renouf, V., Claisse, O., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2005. Understanding the
microbial ecosystem on the grape berry surface through numeration and identification of yeast and bacteria. Aust. J. Grape Wine
Res. 11, 316e327.
Renouf, V., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Walling, E., Coulon, J., 2006. Le suivi
microbiologique du vin, Partie 1: de la parcelle au conditionnement: un outil pour une oenologie raisonnée. Rev. Oenolog. 118,
27e31.
Reuter, M., Bell, G., Greig, D., 2007. Increased outbreeding in yeast in
response to dispersal by an insect vector. Curr. Biol. 17, R81eR83.
de Revel, G., Bloem, A., Augustin, M., Lonvaud-Funel, A.,
Bertrand, A., 2005. Interaction of Oenococcus oeni and oak wood
compounds. Food Microbiol. 22, 569e575.
de Revel, G., Martin, N., Pripis-Nicolau, L., Lonvaud-Funel, A.,
Bertrand, A., 1999. Contribution to the knowledge of malolactic
fermentation influence on wine aroma. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47,
4003e4008.
Revilla, I., González-San José, M.L., 1998. Methanol release during
fermentation of red grapes treated with pectolytic enzymes. Food
Chem. 63, 307e312.
Revilla, I., González-San José, M.L., 2003. Addition of pectolytic enzymes: an enological practice which improves the chromaticity
and stability of red wines. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 38, 29e36.
Revilla, E., Ryan, J.M., Kovac, V., Nemanic, J., 1998. The effect of the
addition of supplementary seeds and skins during fermentation
on the chemical and sensory characteristics of red wines. Dev.
Food Sci. 40, 583e596.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1985. New developments in wine microbiology.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 36, 1e9.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Dubourdieu, D.,
Lucmaret, V., Larue, F., 1979. Métabolism de Saccharomyces cerevisiae
dans le môut de raisins parasités par Botrytis cinerea. Inhibition de la
fermentation, formation d’acide acétique et de glycerol. C. R. Acad.
Sci. Paris. Ser. D 289, 441e444.

567

Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Larue, F., Chaumet, P., 1987. The effect of addition
of sucrose and aeration to grape must on growth and metabolic activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Vitis 26, 208e214.
Ribéreau-Gayon, J., Peynaud, E., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Sudraud, P., 1975.
Traité d’Oenologie. In: Sciences et Techniques du Vin, vol. 2.
Ribéreau-Gayon, J., Peynaud, E., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Sudraud, P., 1976.
Traité d’Oenologie. In: Sciences et Techniques du Vin, vol. 3.
Dunod, Paris.
Richter, H., Hamann, I., Unden, G., 2003. Use of mannitol pathway in
fructose fermentation of Oenococcus oeni due to limiting redox generation capacity of the ethanol pathway. Arch. Microbiol. 179,
227e233.
Riou, C., Nicaud, J.M., Barre, P., Gaillardin, C., 1997. Stationary phase
gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae during wine
fermentation. Yeast 13, 903e915.
Roberts, J., Power, A., Chapman, J., Chandra, S., Cozzolino, D., 2018.
The use of UV-Vis spectroscopy in bioprocess and fermentation
monitoring. Fermentation 4, 18.
Roland, A., Schneider, R., Charrier, F., Cavelier, F., Rossignol, M.,
Razungles, A., 2011. Distribution of varietal thiol precursors in
the skin and the pulp of Melon B. and Sauvignon blanc grapes.
Food Chem. 125, 139e144.
Rollero, S., Zietsman, A.J.J., Buffetto, F., Schückel, J., Ortiz-Julien, A.,
Divol, B., 2018. Kluveromyces marxianus secretes a pectinase in Shiraz grape must the impacts technological properties and aroma
profile of wine. J. Agric. Food Chem. 66, 11739e11747.
Romano, P., Fiore, C., Paraggio, M., Caruso, M., Capece, A., 2003. Function of yeast species and strains in wine flavour. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 86, 169e180.
Romero-Cascales, I., Ortega-Regules, A., López-Roca, J.M., FernándezFernández, J.I., Gómez-Plaza, E., 2005. Differences in anthocyanin
extractability from grapes to wines according to variety. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 56, 212e219.
Rose, A.H., 1989. Influence of the environment on microbial lipid
composition. In: Ratledge, C., Wilkinson, S.G. (Eds.), Microbial
Lipids, vol. 2. Academic Press, London, UK, pp. 255e278.
Rosini, G., 1986. Winemaking by cell-recycle-batch fermentation
process. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 24, 140e143.
Rossignol, T., Dulau, L., Julien, A., Blondin, B., 2003. Genome-wide
monitoring of wine yeast gene expression during alcoholic
fermentation. Yeast 20, 1369e1385.
Rossignol, T., Postaire, O., Storai, J., Blondin, B., 2006. Analysis of the
genomic response of a wine yeast to rehydration and inoculation.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 71, 699e712.
Rossouw, D., Du Toit, M., Bauer, F.F., 2012. The impact of co-inoculation
with Oenococcus oeni on the trancriptome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and on the flavour-active metabolite profiles during fermentation in
synthetic must. Food Microbiol. 29, 121e131.
Roustan, J.L., Sablayrolles, J.M., 2002. Impact of the addition of electron
acceptors on the by-products of alcoholic fermentation. Enzyme
Microbial. Technol. 31, 142e152.
Rozès, N., Arola, L., Bordons, A., 2003. Effect of phenolic compounds
on the cometabolism of citric acid and sugars by Oenococcus oeni
from wine. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 36, 337e341.
Ruediger, G.A., Pardon, K.H., Sas, A.N., Godden, P.W., Pollnitz, A.P.,
2005. Fate of pesticides during the winemaking process in relation
to malolactic fermentation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 3023e3026.
Ruiz-Larrea, F., Rojo-Bezares, B., Sáenz, Y., Navarro, L., Dı́ez, L.,
Portugal, C.B., et al., 2007. Bacteriocins for wine microbiological
control and reduction of SO2 levels. Bull. O.I.V. 80, 445e457.
Sablayrolles, J.M., Barre, P., 1986. Evaluation of oxygen requirement of
alcoholic fermentations in simulated enological conditions. Sci. Aliments 6, 373e383.
Sá Correia, I., Salgueiro, S.P., Viegas, C.A., Novais, J.M., 1989. Leakage
induced by ethanol, octanoic and decanoic acids in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Yeast 5, S124eS129.

568

7. Fermentation

Saint-Criq, N., Vivas, N., Glories, Y., 1998. Maturité phénolique: définition et contrôle. Rev. Fr. Oenol. 173, 22e25.
Sala, C., Fort, F., Busto, O., Zamora, F., Arola, L., Guasch, J., 1996. Fate
of some common pesticides during vinification process. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 44, 3668e3671.
Sales, K., Brandt, W., Rumbek, E., Lindsey, G., 2000. The LEA-like protein HSP12 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has a plasma membrane
location and protects membranes against desiccation and ethanolinduced stress. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1463, 267e278.
Salinas, M.R., Garijo, J., Pardo, F., Zalacain, A., Alonso, G.L., 2003. Color, polyphenol, and aroma compounds in rosé wines after prefermentative maceration and enzymatic treatments. Am. J. Enol.
Vitic. 54, 195e202.
Salvadó, Z., Arroyo-López, F.N., Guillamón, J.M., Salazar, G.,
Querol, A., Barrio, E., 2011. Temperature adaptation markedly determines evolution within the genus Saccharomyces. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 77, 2292e2302.
Salvadores, M., Dı́az, M.E., Cardell, E., 1993. Levaduras autóctonas
aisladas en vinos de Tenerife y su influencia en las concentraciones
de acetato de etilo y alcoholes superiores analizados por
cromatograf’ıa de gases. Microbiol. SEM 9, 107e112.
Sampaio, J.P., Gonçalves, P., 2008. Natural populations of Saccharomyces
kudriavzevii in Portugal are associated with oak bark and are sympatric with S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
74, 2144e2152.
San Romáo, M.V., Coste Belchior, A.P., 1982. Study of the influence of
some antifungal products on the microbiological flora of grapes
and musts. [In Portuguese]. Ciénc. Téc. Vitivinic. 1, 101e112.
San Romáo, M.V., Coste Belchior, A.P., Silva Alemáo, M., Gonçalves
Bento, A., 1985. Observations sur le métabolisme des bacteries lactiques dans les moûts de raisins altéres. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 19,
109e116.
Santamarı́a, P., Garijo, P., López, R., Tenorio, C., Gutiérrez, A.R., 2005.
Analysis of yeast population during spontaneous alcoholic fermentation: effect of the age of the cellar and the practice of inoculation.
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 103, 49e56.
Santos, J., Sousa, M.J., Cardoso, H., Inácio, J., Silva, S., Spencer Martins, I.,
et al., 2008. Ethanol tolerance of sugar transport, and the rectification
of stuck wine fermentations. Microbiology 154, 422e430.
Sauvageot, F., Vivier, P., 1997. Effects of malolactic fermentation on sensory properties of four Burgundy wines. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 48,
187e192.
Schanderl, H., 1959. Die Mikrobiologie des Mostes und Weines, second
ed. Ulmer, Stuttgart, Germany.
Schmid, F., Schadt, J., Jiranek, V., Block, D.E., 2009. Formation of temperature gradients in large- and small-scale red wine fermentations
during cap management. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 15, 249e255.
Schelezki, O.J., Smith, P.A., Hranilovic, A., Bindon, K.A., Jeffery, D.W.,
2018. Comparison of consecutive harvests versus blending treatments to produce lower alcohol wines from Cabernet Sauvignon
grapes: impact on polysaccharide and tannin content and
composition. Food Chem. 244, 50e59.
Schmidt, J.O., Noble, A.C., 1983. Investigation of the effect of skin contact time on wine flavor. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 34, 135e138.
Schneider, V., 1998. Must hyperoxidation: a review. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
49, 65e73.
Schulze, U., Lidén, G., Nielsen, J., Villadsen, J., 1996. Physiological effects of nitrogen starvation in anaerobic batch culture of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiology 142, 2299e2310.
Schütz, M., Gafner, J., 1993a. Analysis of yeast diversity during spontaneous and induced alcoholic fermentations. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 75,
551e558.
Schütz, M., Gafner, J., 1993b. Sluggish alcoholic fermentation in relation to alternations of the glucose-fructose ratio. Chem. Mikrobiol.
Technol. Lebensm. 15, 73e78.

Sebastian, P., Nadeau, J.P., 2002. Experiments and modeling of falling
jet flash evaporators for vintage treatment. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 41,
269e280.
Seckler, J., 1997. Ganztraubenpressung. ATW-Forschungsbericht Nr.
88, Darmstadt, Germany.
Shimazu, Y., Uehara, M., Watanbe, M., 1985. Transformation of citric
acid to acetic acid, acetoin and diacetyl by wine making lactic
acid bacteria. Agric. Biol. Chem. 49, 2147e2157.
Seckler, J., Jung, R., Freund, M., 2001. Transport und Förderung von
Trauben und MaischedUntersuchung zur Optimierung des Transports und der Förderung von Trauben und Maische. ATWForschungsbericht (108). KTBL, Darmstadt.
Sheridan, M.K., Elias, R.J., 2015. Exogenous acetaldehyde as a tool for
modulating wine color and astringency during fermentation. Food
Chem. 177, 17e22.
Siegrist, J., 1985. Les tanins et les anthocyanes du Pinot et les phénomènes de macération. Rev. Oenologues 11 (38), 11e13.
Silva, I., Campos, F.M., Hogg, T., Couto, J.A., 2011. Factors influencing
the production of volatile phenols by wine lactic acid bacteria. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 145, 471e475.
Silva, A., Lambri, M., 2006. Oxygen measures and consumption in
must and wine. Anal. Chim. Acta 563, 391e395.
Silva, S., Ramón-Portugal, F., Andrade, P., Abreu, S., de Fatima
Texeira, M., Strehaiano, P., 2003. Malic acid consumption by dry
immobilized cells of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
54, 50e55.
Simó, G., Vila-Crespo, J., Fernández-Fernández, E., Ruipérez, V., Rodrı́gez-Nogales, J.M., 2017. Highly efficient malolactic fermentation of
red wine using encapsulated bacteria in a robust biocomposite of
silica-alginate. J. Agric. Food Chem. 65, 5188e5197.
Simpson, R.F., 1982. Factors affecting oxidative browning of white
wine. Vitis 21, 233e239.
Sinclair, D.A., Guarente, L., 1997. Extrachromosomal rDNA circles e a
cause of aging in yeast. Cell 91, 1033e1042.
Singleton, V.L., 1987. Oxygen with phenols and related reactions in
musts, wines, and model systems: observations and practical
implications. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 38, 69e77.
Singleton, V.L., Sieberhagen, H.A., de Wet, P., van Wyk, C.J., 1975.
Composition and sensory qualities of wines prepared from white
grapes by fermentation with and without grape solids. Am. J.
Enol. Vitic. 26, 62e69.
Singleton, V.L., Zaya, J., Trousdale, E., 1980. White table wine quality
and polyphenol composition as affected by must SO2 content and
pomace contact time. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 31, 14e20.
Sipiczki, M., Romano, P., Capece, A., Parragio, M., 2004. Genetic segregation of natural Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains derived from spontaneous fermentation of Aglianico wine. J. Appl. Microbiol. 96,
1169e1175.
Smit, A.Y., Du Toit, M., 2013. Evaluating the influence of malolactic
fermentation inoculation practices and ageing on lees on
biogenic amine production in wine. Food Process Technol. 6,
198e206.
Sniegowski, P.D., Dombrowski, P.G., Fingerman, E., 2002. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces paradoxus coexist in a natural
woodland site in North America and display different levels of
reproductive isolation from European conspecifics. FEMS Yeast
Res. 1, 299e306.
Soden, A., Francis, I.L., Oakey, H., Henschke, P.A., 2000. Effects of cofermentation with Candida stellata and Saccharomyces cerevisiae on
the aroma and composition of Chardonnay wine. Aust. J. Grape
Wine Res. 6, 21e30.
Sokolowshy, M., Rosenberger, A., Fischer, U., 2015. Sensory impact of
skin contact on white wines characterized by descriptive analysis,
timeeintensity analysis and temporal dominance of sensations
analysis. Food Qual. Pref. 39, 285e297.

References

Soleas, G.J., Tomlinson, G., Goldberg, D.M., 1998. Kinetics of polyphenol release into wine must during fermentation of different
cultivars. J. Wine Res. 9, 27e42.
Somers, T.C., Pocock, K.F., 1986. Phenolic harvest criteria for red
vinification. Aust. Grapegrower Winemaker 256, 24e30.
Somers, T.C., Pocock, K.F., 1991. Phenolic assessment of white musts:
varietal differences in free-run juices and pressings. Vitis 26, 189e201.
Somers, T.C., Ziemelis, G., 1985. Flavonol haze in white wines. Vitis 24,
43e50.
Soubeyrand, V., Luparia, V., Williams, P., Doco, T., Vernhet, A., Ortiz
Julien, A., et al., 2005. Formation of micella containing solubilized
sterols during rehydration of active dry yeasts improves their fermenting capacity. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 8025e8032.
Soufleros, E., Bertrand, A., 1988. Les acides gras libres du vin, observations sur leur origine. Connaiss. Vigne Vin 22, 251e260.
Spano, G., Rinaldi, A., Ugliano, M., Moio, L., Beneduce, L., Massa, S.,
2005. A b-glucosidase gene isolated from wine Lactobacillus plantarum is regulated by abiotic stresses. J. Appl. Microbiol. 98, 855e861.
Sparrow, A.M., Smart, R.E., Dambergs, R.G., Close, D.C., 2016a. Skin
particle size affects the phenolic attributes of Pinot noir wine: proof
of concept. Am J. Enol. Vitic. 67, 29e37.
Sparrow, A.M., Holt, H.E., Pearson, W., Damberegs, R., Close, D.C.,
2016b. Accentuated cut edges (ACE): effects of skin fragmentation
on the composition and sensory attributes of Pinot noir wines.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 67, 169e178.
Sponholz, W.R., Hühn, T., 1996. Aging of Wine: 1,1,6-Trimethyl 1,2dihycronaphthalene (TDN) and 2-aminoacetophenone. In:
Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool Climate Vitic.
Enol. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station, Geneva,
NY, pp. VI-37eVI-57.
Steenseis, J., Meersman, E., Snoek, T., Saels, V., Verstepen, K.J., 2014.
Large-scale selection and breeding to generate industrial yeasts
with superior aroma production. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80,
6965e6975.
Stefanini, I., Dapporto, L., Berná, L., Polsinelli, M., Turillazzi, S.,
Cabalieri, D., 2016. Social wasps are a Saccharomyces mating
nest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 2247e2251.
Stovicek, V., Holkenbrink, C., Borodina, I., 2017. CRISPR/Cas system
for yeast genome engineering: advances and applications. FEMS
Yeast Res. 17 (5) fox030.
Stuckey, W., Iland, P., Henschke, P.A., Gawel, R., 1991. The effect of lees
contact time on chardonnay wine composition. In: Rantz, J.M. (Ed.),
Proc. Int. Symp. Nitrogen Grapes Wine American Society for
Enology and Viticulture, Davis, CA, pp. 315e319.
Sturgeon, J.Q., Bohlscheid, J.C., Edwards, C.G., 2013. The effect of nitrogen source on yeast metabolism and H2S formation. J. Wine
Res. 24, 182e194.
Sulo, P., Michacáková, S., Reiser, V., 1992. Construction and properties
of K1 type killer wine yeast. Biotechnol. Lett. 14, 55e60.
Sun, B.S., Pinto, T., Leandro, M.C., Ricardo-Da-Silva, J.M.,
Spranger, M.I., 1999. Transfer of catechins and proanthocyanidins
from solid parts of the grape clusters into wine. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
50, 179e184.
Sun, X., Liu, L., Zhao, Y., Ma, T., Zhao, F., Huang, W., Zhan, J., 2016. Effect of copper stress on growth characteristics and fermentation
properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the pathway of copper
adsorption during wine fermentation. Food Chem. 192, 43e52.
Suzzi, G., Romano, P., 1982. Induced changes by SO2 on the population
of Saccharomyces as agents of the natural fermentation of musts. Vini
d’Italia 24, 138e145.
Suzzi, G., Romano, P., Vannini, L., Turbanti, L., Domizio, P., 1996. Cellrecycle batch fermentation using immobilized cells of flocculent
Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
12, 25e27.

569

Tamborra, T., 1992. Influenza della macerazione sul contenuto di terpeni liberi e glucosidinel Moscatello selvatico. Riv. Vitic. Enol. 45,
35e45.
Teixeira, H., Gonçalves, Rozès, N., Ramos, A., San Romão, M.V., 2002.
Lactobacillic acid accumulation in the plasma membrane of Oenococcus oeni: a response to ethanol stress? Microb. Ecol. 43, 146e153.
Teunissen, A.W.R.H., Steensma, H.Y., 1995. The dominant flocculation
genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae constitute a new subtelomeric gene
family. Yeast 11, 1001e1013.
Thorngate, J.H., 1998. Yeast strain and wine flavor: nature or nurture?
In: Waterhouse, A.L., Ebeler, E.E. (Eds.), Chemistry of Wine Flavor.
Oxford University Press, Washington, DC, pp. 66e80.
Torija, M.J., Rozès, N., Poblet, M., Guillamón, J.M., Mas, A., 2003. Effects of fermentation temperature on the strain population of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 80, 47e53.
Thudichum, J.L.W., Dupré, A., 1872. A Treatise on the Origin, Nature,
and Varieties of Wine: A Complete Manual of Viticulture and
Oenology. MacMillan & Co., London, UK.
Tilloy, V., Ortiz-Julien, A., Dequin, S., 2014. Reduction of ethanol yield
and improvement of glycerol formation by adaptive evolution of
the wine yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae under hyperosmotic
conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 2623e2632.
Tomenchok, D.M., Brandriss, M.C., 1987. Gene-enzyme relationships
in the proline biosynthetic pathway of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J. Bacteriol. 169, 5364e5372.
Tominaga, T., Furrer, A., Henry, R., Dubourdieu, D., 1998. Identification
of new volatile thiols in the aroma of Vitis vinifera L. var. Sauvignon
blanc wines. Flavour Fragr. J. 13, 159e162.
Török, T., Mortimer, R.K., Romano, P., Suzzi, G., Polsinelli, M., 1996.
Quest for wine yeasts e an old story revisited. J. Indust. Microbiol.
17, 303e313.
Tsakiris, A., Sipsas, V., Bekatorou, A., Mallouchos, A., Koutinas, A.A.,
2004. Red wine making by immobilized cells and influence on volatile composition. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52, 1357e1363.
Tyagi, R.D., 1984. Participation of oxygen in ethanol fermentation. Process Biochem. 19 (4), 136e141.
Ugliano, M., 2010. Enzymes in winemaking. In: Moreno-Arribas, M.,
Polo, C. (Eds.), Wine Chemistry and Biochemistry. Springer Verlag,
New York/Heidelberg, pp. 103e126.
Ugliano, M., Moio, L., 2005. Changes in the concentration of yeast
derived volatile compounds of red wine during malolactic fermentation with four commercial starter cultures of Oenococcus oeni.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 10134e10139.
Ugliano, M., Bartowsky, E., Skouroumounis, G., McCarthy, J.,
Pretorius, S., Capone, D., et al., 2006. The role of yeast in the expression of varietal character by the hydrolysis of glycosidicallybound
volatile compounds during fermentation. Aust. NZ Grapegrower
Winemaker 514 (91e92), 94e96.
Valade, M., Bunner, D., Tribaut-Sohier, I., Tusseau, D., Moncomble, D.,
2011. Le gaz carbonique et l’oxygène lors de l’élaboration du
champagne. Rev. Fr. Oenolog. 246 (avril/mai), 1e10.
Valero, E., Moyano, L., Milan, M.C., Medina, M., Ortega, J.M., 2002.
Higher alcohols and esters production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Influence of the initial oxygenation of the grape must. Food
Chem. 78, 57e61.
Valero, E., Schuller, D., Cambon, B., Casal, M., Dequin, S., 2005.
Dissemination and survival of commercial wine yeast in the vineyard: a large-scale, three-years study. FEMS Yeast Res. 5, 959e969.
van der Walt, J.P., 1970. The genus Saccharomyces (Meyer) Reess. In:
Lodder, J. (Ed.), The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, second ed.,
pp. 555e718 Amsterdam, The Netherlands, North-Holland.
Vander Heiden, M.G., Cantley, L.C., Thompson, C.B., 2009. Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell
proliferation. Science 324, 1029e1033.

570

7. Fermentation

Vannobel, C., 1986. Réfexions sur l’évolution récente de la technologie
en matière de maı̂trise des températures de fermentation. Prog.
Agric. Vitic. 21, 488e494.
Varela, C., Seibert, T., Cozzolino, D., Rose, L., McLean, H.,
Henschke, P.A., 2009. Discovering a chemical basis for differentiation wine made by fermentation from ‘wild’ indigenous and inoculated yeasts: role of yeast volatile compounds. Aust. J. Grape
Wine Res. 15, 238e248.
Varela, C., Kutyna, D.R., Solomon, M.R., Black, C.A., Borneman, A.,
Henschke, P.A., et al., 2012. Evaluation of gene modification strategies for the development of low-alcohol-wine yeasts. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 6068e6077.
Vaughan-Martini, A., Martini, A., 2011. Saccharomyces Meyen ex Reess
(1870). In: Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T. (Eds.), The Yeasts,
a Taxonomic Study, fifth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 733e746.
Vaughn, R.H., 1955. Bacterial spoilage of wines with special reference
to California conditions. Adv. Food Res. 7, 67e109.
Vázquez, E.S., Segade, S.R., Fernández, I.O., 2010. Effect of the winemaking technique on phenolic composition and chromatic characteristics in young red wines. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 231, 789e802.
Velázquez, J.B., Longo, E., Sieiro, C., Cansado, J., Calo, P., Villa, T.G.,
1991. Improvement of the alcoholic fermentation of grape juice
with mixed cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wild strains, negative effect of Kloeckera apiculata. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 7,
485e489.
Verbelen, P.J., De Schutter, D.P., Delvaux, F., Verstrepen, K.J.,
Delvaux, F.R., 2006. Immobilized yeast cell systems for continuous
fermentation applications. Biotechnol. Lett. 28, 1515e1525.
Vidal, M.T., Poblet, M., Constantı́, M., Bordons, A., 2001. Inhibitory effect of copper and dichlofluanide on Oenococcus oeni and malolactic
fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 52, 223e229.
Viegas, C.A., Almeida, P.F., Cavaco, M., Sá-Correia, I., 1998. The HþATPase in the plasma membrane of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
activated during growth latency in octanoic acid-supplemented
medium accompanying the decrease in intracellular pH and cell
viability. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 779e783.
Vilanova, M., Pretorium, I.S., Henschke, P.A., 2015. Influence of diammonium phosphate addition to fermentation on wine
biologicals. In: Preedy, V. (Ed.), Processing and Impact of Active
Components in Food. Academic Press, London, UK, pp. 483e491.
Villena, M.A., Iranzo, J.F.U., Perez, A.I.B., 2007. b-Glucosidase activity
in wine yeasts: application in enology. Enz. Microbial Technol. 40,
420e425.
Vivas, N., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Glories, Y., Augustin, M., 1995. The effect of malolactic fermentation in barrels and in tanks on the
composition and the quality of red wines. J. Sci. Tech. Tonnellerie
1, 65e80.
Vivas, N., Lonvaud-Funel, A., Glories, Y., 1997. Effect of phenolic acids
and anthocyanins on the growth, viability and malolactic activity of
a lactic acid bacterium. Food Microbiol. 14, 291e300.
Vlassides, S., Block, D.E., 2000. Evaluation of cell concentration profiles
and mixing in unagitated wine fermentors. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 51,
73e80.
Vos, P.J.A., Gray, R.S., 1979. The origin and control of hydrogen sulfide
during fermentation of grape must. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 187e197.
Vriesekoop, F., Barber, A.R., Pamment, N.B., 2007. Acetaldehyde mediates growth stimulation of ethanon-stressed Saccharomyces cerevisiae: evidence of a redox-driven mechanism. Biotechnol. Lett. 29,
1099e1103.
Walker, G.A., Hjelmeland, A., Bokulich, N.A., Mills, D.A., Ebeler, S.E.,
Bisson, L.F., 2016. Impact of the [GARþ] prion on fermentation and
bacterial community composition with Saccharomyces cerevisiae
UCD932. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 67,296e307.
Walker, G.M., 1998. Magnesium as a stress-protectant for industrial strains
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Am. Soc. Brew. Chem. 56, 109e113.

Walsh, T., Heinrich, A., Skurray, G., 2006. Yeast contributes to Shiraz
aroma and flavour. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 513, 78e80.
Wang, C., Mas, A., Esteve-Zarzoso, B., 2016. The interaction between
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and non-Saccharomyces yeast during alcoholic fermentation is species and strain specific. Front. Microbiol.
7, 502.
Weber, P., Kratzin, H., Brockow, K., Ring, J., Steinhart, H., Paschke, A.,
2009. Lysozyme in wine: a risk evaluation for comsumers allergic to
hen’s egg. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 53, 1469e1477.
Weiss, K.C., Bisson, L.F., 2002. Effect of bentonite treatment of grape
juice on yeast fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 53, 28e36.
Wells, A., Osborne, J.P., 2011. Production of SO2 binding compounds
and SO2 by Saccharomyces during alcoholic fermentation and the
impact on malolactic fermentation. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 32, 267e279.
Wenzel, K., Dittrich, H.H., Seyffardt, H.P., Bohnert, J., 1980. Schwefelrüchstände auf Trauben und Most und ihr Einfluß auf die H2S
Bildung. Wein Wiss 6, 414e420.
White, B.B., Ough, C.S., 1973. Oxygen uptake studies in grape juice.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 24, 148e152.
White, K.D., 1984. Greek and Roman Technology. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, NY.
Whiting, G.C., 1975. Some biochemical and flavour aspects of lactic
acid bacteria in ciders and other alcoholic beverages. In: Carr, J.G.
(Ed.), Lactic Acid Bacteria in Food and Beverages. Academic Press,
London, UK, pp. 69e85.
Wibowo, D., Eschenbruch, R., Davis, C.R., Fleet, G.H., Lee, T.H., 1985.
Occurrence and growth of lactic acid bacteria in wine: a review.
Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 36, 302e313.
Wiederkehr, M., 1997. Must heating versus traditional must
fermentation. In: Henick-Kling, T. (Ed.), 26th. Annu. Wine Ind.
Workshop. New York State Agricultural Experimental Station, Cornell University, Geneva, NY, pp. 18e24.
Wightman, J.D., Price, S.F., Watson, B.T., Wrolstad, R.E., 1997. Some effects of processing enzymes on anthocyanins and phenolics in Pinot
noir and Cabernet Sauvignon wines. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 48, 39e48.
Williams, L.A., 1982. Heat release in alcoholic fermentation: a critical
reappraisal. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 33, 149e153.
Williams, L.A., Boulton, R., 1983. Modeling and prediction of evaporative ethanol loss during wine fermentations. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 34,
234e242.
Williams, P.J., Francis, I.L., Black, S., 1996. Changes in concentration of juice
and must glycosides, including flavor precursors. In: Henick-Kling, T.
(Ed.), Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Cool Climate Vitic. Enol. New York State
Agricultural Experimental Station, Geneva, NY pp. VI-5e10.
Wirth, J., Caillé, S., Souquet, J.M., Samson, A., Dieval, J.B., Vidal, S.,
et al., 2012. Impact of post-bottling oxygen exposure on the sensory
characteristics and phenolic composition of Grenache rosé wines.
Food Chem. 132, 1861e1871.
Wolfe, K.W., Shields, D.S., 1997. Molecular evidence of an ancient
duplication of the entire yeast genome. Nature 387, 708e713.
Wong, S., Butler, G., Wolfe, K.H., 2002. Gene order evolution and paleopolyploidy in hemiascomycete yeasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99,
9272e9277.
Younes, B., Cilindre, C., Villaume, S., Parmentier, M., Jeandet, P.,
Vasserot, Y., 2011. Evidence for an extracellular acid proteolytic activity secreted by living cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae PlR1: impact
on grape proteins. J. Agric. Food Chem. 59, 6239e6246.
Zamora, F., Fort, F., Fuget, J., Bordons, A., Arola, L., 1996. Influence de
certains facteurs lors de la fermentation alcoolique sur le transport
de glucose dans les levures. In: Lonvaud-Funel (Ed.), Oenologie 95.
5e Symposium International d’Oenologie. Lavoisier Tec/Doc, Paris,
pp. 167e171.
Zapparoli, G., Tosi, E., Azzolini, M., Vagnoli, P., Krieger, S., 2009. Bacterial inoculation strategies for the achievement of malolactic
fermentation in high-alcohol wines. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 30, 49e55.

Suggested reading

Zavaleta, A.I., Martinex-Murica, A.J., Rodriguez-Valera, F., 1997. Intraspecific genetic diversity of Oenococcus oeni as derived from DNA
fingerprinting and sequence analyses. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
64, 1261e1267.
Zinnai, A., Venturi, F., Quartacci, M.F., Andreotti, A., Andrich, G., 2010.
The kinetic effect of some wine components on the enzymatic hydrolysis of b-glucan. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 31, 9e13.
Zoecklein, B.W., Collins, D., McCarthy, B., Vaillant, K., 2004. Effect of
délestage with seed deportation on Merlot and Cabernet Sauvignon
wines. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 55, 437A.
Zoecklein, B., Fugelsang, K.C., Gump, B.H., Nury, F.S., 1995. Wine
Analysis and Production. Chapman Hall, New York.
Zohary, D., Hopf, M., 2000. Domestication of Plants in the Old World,
third ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Suggested reading
General texts
Boulton, R.B., Singleton, V.L., Bisson, L.F., Kunkee, R.E., 1996. Principles and Practices of Winemaking. Springer, New York, NY.
Dittrich, H.H., Grossmann, H., 2011. Mikrobiologie des Weines, fourth
ed. Verlat Ulmer, Stuttgart, Germany.
Edwards, C.G., 2006. Illustrated Guide to Microbes and Sediments in
Wine, Beer, and Juice. WineBugs LLC, Pullman, WA.
Fugelsang, K.C., Edwards, C., 2007. Wine Microbiology. Practical Applications and Procedures, second ed. Springer, New York, NY.
König, H., Unden, G., Fröhlich, J. (Eds.), 2009. Biology of Microorganisms on Grapes, in Must and in Wine. Springer, New York, NY.
Moreno-Arribas, M.V., Polo, C., 2010. Wine Chemistry and
Biochemistry. Springer Science þ Business Media, New York, NY.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Donèche, B., Dubourdieu, D., Lonvaud, A., 2006.
Handbook of Enology, vol. I: (The Microbiology of Wine and Vinifications), second ed. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK.
Vine, R.P., Bordelon, B., Harkness, E.M., Browning, T., Wagner, C., 1997.
From Grape Growing to Marketplace. Chapman & Hall, New York,
NY.

Grape processing (maceration and pressing)
Aleixandre-Tudo, J.L., Du Toit, W., 2018. Cold maceration application
in red wine production and its effects on phenolic compounds: a
review. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 95, 200e208.
Casassa, L.F., Harbertson, J.F., 2014. Extraction, evolution, and sensory
impact of phenolic compounds during red wine maceration. Annu.
Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 5, 83e109.
Christmann, M., Freund, M., 2010. Advances in grape processing
equipment. In: Reynolds, A.G. (Ed.), Managing Wine Quality. Vol.
I. Viticulture and Wine Quality. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., Cambridge, UK, pp. 547e558.
Razungles, A., 2010. Extraction technologies and wine quality. In:
Reynolds, A.G. (Ed.), Managing Wine Quality. Vol. II. Viticulture
and Wine Quality. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., Oxford, UK,
pp. 589e630.
Sacchi, K.L., Bisson, L.F., Adams, D.O., 2005. A review of the effect of
winemaking techniques on phenolic extraction in red wines. Am.
J. Enol. Vitic. 56, 197e206.
Sommer, S., Cohen, S.D., 2018. Comparison of different extraction
methods to predict anthocyanin concentration and color characteristics of red wines. Fermentation 4, 39.

Adjustments before fermentation
Canal-Llaubères, R.-M., 2010. Enzymes and wine quality. In:
Reynolds, A.G. (Ed.), Managing Wine Quality. Vol. 2. Oenology

571

and Wine Quality. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., Cambridge, UK,
pp. 93e132.
Casalta, E., Vernhet, A., Sablayrolles, J.-M., Tesnière, C., Salmon, J.-M.,
2016. Review: characterization and role of grape solids during alcoholic fermentation under enological conditions. Am. J. Enol. Vitic.
67, 133e138.
Ciani, M., Morales, P., Comitini, F., Tronchoni, J., Canonico, L., et al.,
2016. Non-conventional yeast species for lowering ethanol content
of wines. Front. Microbiol. 7, 642.

General fermentation reviews
Kunkee, R.E., Bisson, L.F., 1993. Wine Making Yeasts. In: The Yeasts. In:
Rose, A.H., Harrison, J.S. (Eds.), , second ed.vol. 5. Academic Press,
London, UK, pp. 69e127.
Moreno-Arribas, M.V., Polo, M.C., 2005. Winemaking biochemistry
and microbiology: current knowledge and future trends. Crit.
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 45, 265e286.

Yeast biochemistry and action
Dickinson, J.R., Schweizer, M. (Eds.), 2004. Metabolism and Molecular
Physiology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, second ed. CRC Press, Taylor
and Francis, London, UK.
Downs, D.M., 2006. Understanding microbial metabolism. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 60, 533e559.
Hirst, M.B., Richter, C.L., 2016. Review of aroma formation through
metabolic pathways of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in beverage
fermentations. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 67, 361e370.
Swiegers, J.H., Bartowsky, E.J., Henschke, P.A., Pretorius, I.S., 2005.
Yeast and bacterial modulation of wine aroma and flavour. Aust.
J. Wine Res. 11, 139e173.

Yeast classification and evolution
Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T. (Eds.), 2011. The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study, fifth ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Legras, J.-L., Merdinoglu, D., Cornuet, J.-M., Karst, F., 2007. Bread, beer
and wine: Saccharomyces cerevisiae diversity reflects human history.
Mol. Ecol. 16, 2091e2102.
Douglas, G.L., Klaenhammer, T.R., 2010. Genomic evolution of domesticated microorganisms. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 1, 397e414.
Piskur, J., Rozpedowska, E., Polakova, S., Merico, A., Compagno, C.,
2006. How did Saccharomyces evolve to become a good brewer?
Trends Genet. 22, 183e186.
Sipiczki, M., 2011. Diversity, variability and fast adaptive evolution of
the wine yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) genomeda review. Ann.
Microbiol. 61, 85e93.

Inoculation, ecology and sensory influences on wine
production
Barata, A., Malfeito-Ferreira, M., Loureiro, V., 2012. The microbial ecology of wine grape berries. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 153, 243e259.
Blanco, P., Orriols, I., Losada, A., 2011. Survival of commercial yeasts in
the winery environment and their prevalence during spontaneous
fermentations. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 38, 235e239.
Ciani, M., Comitini, F., 2015. Yeast interactions in multi-starter wine
fermentation. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 1, 1e6.
Fleet, G.H., 2003. Yeast interactions and wine flavour. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 86, 11e22.
González, R., Muñoz, R., Carrascosa, A.V., 2011. Production of wine
starter cultures. In: Santiago, A.V.C., Munoz, R., Garcia, R.G.
(Eds.), Molecular Wine Microbiology. Academic Press, London,
UK, pp. 279e302.
Mateo, J.J., Maicas, S., 2016. Application of non-Saccharomyces yeasts to
wine-making process. Fermentation 2, 14.

572

7. Fermentation

Petruzzi, L., Capozzi, V., Berbegal, C., Corbo, M.R., Bevilacqua, A.,
Spano, G., Sinigaglia, M., 2017. Microbial resources and enological
significance: opportunities and benefits. Front. Microbiol. 8, 995.

Yeast genetics
Bisson, L.F., Karpel, J.E., 2010. Genetics of yeast impacting wine quality.
Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 1, 139e162.
Borneman, A.R., Chambers, P.J., Pretorium, I.S., 2009. Systems biol ogy
as a platform for wine yeast strain development. In: König, H.,
Unden, G., Fröhlich, J. (Eds.), Biology of Microorganisms on
Grapes, in Must and in Wine. Springer, New York, NY, pp. 489e511.
Donalies, U.E.B., Nguyen, H.T.T., Stahl, U., Nevoigt, E., 2008. Improvement of Saccharomyces yeast strains used in brewing, winemaking
and baking. Adv. Biochem. Bioeng./Biotechnol. 111, 67e98.
Generoso, W.C., Gottardi, M., Oreb, M., Boles, E., 2016. Simplified
CRISPR-Cas genome editing of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J. Microbiol. Method. 127, 203e205.
Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T., 2011. Gene sequence analyses
and other DNA-based methods for yeast species recognition. In:
Kurtzman, C.P., Fell, J.W., Boekhout, T. (Eds.), The Yeasts, Taxonomic Study, fifth ed., pp. 137e144.
Masneuf-Pomarede, I., Bely, M., Marullo, P., Albertin, W., 2016. The genetics of non-conventional wine yeasts: current knowledge and
future challenges. Front. Microbiol. 6, 1563.

Environmental factors
Bell, S.-J., Henschke, P.A., 2005. Implications of nitrogen nutrition for
grapes, fermentation and wine. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 11,
242e295.
Birch, R.M., Ciani, M., Walker, G.M., 2003. Magnesium, calcium and
fermentative metabolism in wine yeasts. J. Wine Res. 14, 3e15.
Cabras, P., Angioni, A., 2000. Pesticide residues in grapes, wine, and
their processing products. J. Agric. Food Chem. 48, 967e973.
Cabras, P., Angioni, A., Garau, V.L., Pirisi, F.M., Farris, G.A.,
Madau, G., et al., 1999. Pesticides in fermentative processes in
wine. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47, 3854e3857.
Hallsworth, J.E., 1998. Ethanol-induced water stress in yeasts.
J. Ferment. Bioeng. 85, 125e137.
Heinisch, J.J., Rodicio, R., 2009. Physical and Chemical Stress Factors in
Yeast. In: König, H., Unden, G., Fröhlich, J. (Eds.), Biology of Microorganisms on Grapes, in Must and in Wine. Springer, New York,
NY, pp. 275e292.
O’Kennedy, K., Reid, G., 2008. Yeast nutrient management in
winemaking. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 537 (92), 94e100.

Querol, A., Fernández-Espinar, M.T., del Olmo, M., Barro, E., 2003.
Adaptive evolution of wine yeast. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 86, 3e10.
Slaughter, J.C., 1989. The effects of carbon dioxide on yeasts. In:
Cantarelli, C., Lanzarini, G. (Eds.), Biotechnology Applications in
Beverage Production. Elsevier Applied Science, London, UK,
pp. 49e64.
van Rensburg, P., Pretorius, I.S., 2000. Enzymes in winemaking: harnessing natural catalysts for efficient biotransformations e a
review. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 21 (Special Issue), 52e73.

Stuck and sluggish fermentation
Blateyron, L., Ortiz-Julien, A., Sablayrolles, J.M., 2003. Stuck fer mentations: oxygen and nitrogen requirements e importance of optimising their addition. Aust. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 478, 73e79.
Bisson, L.F., Butzke, C.E., 2000. Diagnosis and rectification of stuck and
sluggish fermentations. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 51, 168e177.
Magliani, W., Conti, S., Gerloni, M., Bertolotti, D., Polonelli, L., 1997.
Yeast killer systems. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 10, 369e400.
Malherbe, S., Bauer, F.F., Du Toit, M., 2007. Understanding problem fermentations e a review. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 28, 169e186.

Malolactic fermentation
Alexandre, H., Costello, P.J., Remize, F., Guzzo, J., GuillouxBenatier, M., 2004. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Oenococcus oeni interactions in wine: current knowledge and perspectives. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 93, 141e154.
Bartowsky, E.J., Borneman, A.R., 2011. Genomic variations of Oenococcus oeni strains and the potential to impact on malolactic fermentation and aroma compounds in wine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
92, 441e447.
Dicks, L.M.T., Endo, A., 2009. Taxonomic status of lactic acid bacteria in
wine and key characteristics to differentiate species. S. Afr. J. Enol.
Vitic. 30, 72e90.
Lerm, E., Englebrecht, L., du Toit, M., 2010. Malolactic fermentation:
the ABCs of MLF. S. Afr. J. Enol. Vitic. 31, 186e212.
Marcobal, A.M., Sela, D.A., Wolf, Y.I., Markarova, K.S., Mills, D.A.,
2008. Role of hypermutability in the evolution of the genus
Oenococcus. J. Bacteriol. 190, 564e570.
Morenzoni, R. (Ed.), 2015. Malolactic FermentationdImportance of
Wine Lactic Acid Bacterial in Winemaking. Lallemand Inc., Montréal, Canada.
Osborne, J.P., Edwards, C.G., 2005. Bacteria important during
winemaking. Adv. Food Nutrition. Res. 50, 139e177.
Smid, E.J., Kleerebezem, M., 2014. Production of aroma compounds in
lactic fermentations. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 5, 313e326.

