Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Food Research International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/foodres

Inﬂuence of microbial communities on the chemical and sensory features of
Falanghina sweet passito wines
Francesca De Filippisa,b, Maria Apontea, Paola Piombinob,c, Maria Tiziana Lisantic, Luigi Moioc,
⁎
Danilo Ercolinia,b, Giuseppe Blaiottac,
a

Department of Agricultural Sciences, Division of Microbiology, University of Naples Federico II, Via Università 100, 80055 Portici, Naples, Italy
Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
c
Department of Agricultural Sciences, Division of Vine and Wine Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Viale Italia, 83100 Avellino, Italy
b

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Falanghina
Passito sweet wine
Microbiota
Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA)
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)

Natural (N) as well as starter inoculated (S, inoculated with Saccharomyces cerevisiae M3–5; CZS, Candida
zemplinina T13, Zygosaccharomyces bailii NS113 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae M3–5) fermentations of Falanghina
must from dehydrated grape were monitored. Culture dependent analyses and amplicon-based high-throughput
sequencing targeting 18S rRNA and 16S rRNA genes were used to monitor the fungal and bacterial communities
(8 sampling points during 65 days). The resulting wines were subject to both sensory evaluation and volatile
organic compounds analysis.
Fungal community of un-inoculated musts (N) at beginning of the fermentation was mainly represented by
Aureobasidium, Cladosporium, Sclerotinia, while Candida, Debaryomyces, Hanseniaspora, Metschnikowia, Pichia,
Saccharomyces and Zygosaccharomyces showed a very low occurrence. The dominance of Hanseniaspora vineae
and/or Hanseniaspora uvarum was clear up to 29th days of fermentation. S. cerevisiae occurred in all the phases
but become dominant only at the end of the process.
The odour proﬁles as evaluate by Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA) highlighted a signiﬁcant impact of
the fungal populations on the olfactory proﬁles of the wines. Raisins, dried fruits, Sherry and liqueur were
stronger in both S and CZS, while N was mostly discriminated by solvent/chemical and ﬂoral features. Outcomes
underpin the impact of microbiota on the chemical and odour traits of Falanghina passito wines.

1. Introduction
From the Vins de paille of France to Austrian Strohwein, wines made
from dried grapes are a centuries-old tradition. From this perspective,
Italy can boast excellence of many notorious and time-honored sweet or
dry passito wines, both from white or red grapes dehydrated on-vine or
post-harvest under the sun, in shaded aerated rooms or in fully controlled environmental conditions. Withering (Appassimento) is a lost-intime process whereby grapes are partially dried mostly to concentrate
sugars and ﬂavors prior to viniﬁcation. Moreover, the production
technologies may be deeply variable and may include important parameters, such as slow/long multiple fermentations, the addition of fresh
must during the fermentation, the wine ageing in oak barrels and many
others. All these gives rise to diﬀerent wine styles, corresponding to
typical products characterized by distinctive sensory characteristics and
ﬂavor complexity (Moio & Piombino, 2013).
The basic Appassimento styles diﬀer markedly depending on the

⁎

area. Diﬀerent grape varieties are dried in distinctive ways and for a
variable time, depending on the quality of the harvest, as well as on the
local tradition or DOC/DOCG (Appellation of Controlled Origin/
Appellation of Controlled and Guaranteed Origin) regulations. In other
words, the high number of variables involved makes such phase hard to
standardize. As grapes are slowly dehydrated in fruttaio without environmental conditioning in the traditional passito wine production, the
incidence of noble rot on the grapes can be extremely variable, according to the weather conditions.
Indeed, a crucial aspect in passito wines production is the fermentation step. Such phase is often delegated to the fresh must microbiota
although cellar residential yeasts can play an important role as shown
by diﬀerent researchers (Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a; De Filippis, La
Storia, & Blaiotta, 2017; Tofalo et al., 2009). However, in Vin Santo
production, a natural starter culture (known as the mother sediment) is
used to enrich the must (Domizio et al., 2007). Musts for passito wine
production are characterized by a high sugar content (over 300 g/L),

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: blaiotta@unina.it (G. Blaiotta).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2018.11.033
Received 26 July 2018; Received in revised form 13 November 2018; Accepted 16 November 2018
0963-9969/ © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Please cite this article as: De Filippis, F., Food Research International, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2018.11.033

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

cerevisiae M3–5 at about 105 CFU/mL. The remaining two batches “N”
were left to spontaneous fermentation, thus serving as controls. Strains
were previously grown in a medium with high sugar content (yeast
extract 10 g/L, peptone 20 g/L, sucrose 350 g/L, pH 3.5) at 25 °C for
3 days. At the onset of fermentation, all batches were supplemented
with 100 mg/L of Nutistart (Laﬀort, Bordeaux Cedex), containing assimilable nitrogen and thiamine, was used as fermentation activator
(100 mg/L provides 14 mg/l of total available nitrogen and 0.13 mg/L
of thiamine). Such addition was repeated after 7 days (at 50 mg/L).
Fermentations were carried out at 18–20 °C. After 49 days, a ﬁrst
racking was performed and lees were discarded. At 66 days, after a
second racking, wines were further sulphitated (50 mg/L), bottled and
stored at 10 °C. Fermentations were physico-chemically and microbiologically monitored by collecting samples at 0, 4, 7, 13, 20, 29, 34,
42, 63, and 66 days of fermentation. After one month of storage at
10 °C, wines were subjected to sensory evaluation and volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) analysis.

coupled to a high concentration of acids, polyphenols, metal ions and
Maillard reaction's by-products, that may contribute to stuck or sluggish
fermentation (Tofalo et al., 2009). To address this problem, many
winemakers inoculate pure yeast cultures into the must after pressing
instead.
Only a few works have focused on the selection of autochthonous
yeast strains to eﬃciently lead the main fermentation. Aponte and
Blaiotta (2016a) adopted indigenous yeast strains for the fermentation
on a pre-competitive scale of Moscato di Saracena, a passito wine produced in Southern Italy, while Azzolini and co-workers (2013) coupled
the use of selected yeast strains in fermentation, with the use of Botrytis
cinerea cultures during drying in the viniﬁcation of Amarone and Recioto
wines. Moreover, Rantsiou et al. (2012) demonstrated that mixed
starters including S. cerevisiae and C. zemplinina could be proﬁtably used
to reduce the production of acetic acid by S. cerevisiae in sweet wine
fermentations.
In the present study, natural and starter-inoculated fermentations of
musts of sun dried Falanghina grapes were monitored. This typical
grape cultivar of the Campania Region (Southern Italy) is characterized
by a middle trunk-conical bunch, winged with medium-sized grapes
provided with thick and waxy peel, crispy pulp from slightly ﬂoral
ﬂavor, which gives rise to musts with a strong acidity. Physico-chemical
and microbiological evaluations were performed from the beginning
until the end of the fermentation to describe the kinetics and to depict
fungal and bacterial population changes. Finally, we evaluated the
sensorial proﬁle and the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) of the
resulting wines to investigate the impact of the microbial populations
on the chemical and odour proﬁles of this wine.

2.3. Physico-chemical analyses
Brix degrees and pH were assessed by using a portable refractometer
(0–80% Sper Scientiﬁc, PBI International) and a lab pH-meter (XS,
model pH 50), respectively. Total acidity of samples was estimated by
titration with NaOH 0.25 N on 25 mL of must/wine samples, and expressed as tartaric acid (g/L). Glucose, fructose, glycerol, and ethanol
contents were evaluated by HPLC analyses as previously described
(Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a). A Gilson 307 Series HPLC system equipped
with a refractive index detector (RID 133, Gilson) coupled to a MetCarb68H column (6.5 × 300 mm, Varian) was used. Tartaric, malic,
acetic and lactic acids were estimated HPLC by using an Agilent 1100
Series HPLC system equipped with a DAD detector (Agilent 1100 series
G13114B) and a Spherisorb ODS2 column (5 μm 4,6 × 250 mm, SigmaAldrich).
Color intensity and tonality were evaluated by spectrophotometer
reading the absorbance at 420, 520 and 620 nm (Eppendorf Basic
BioSpectrometer), after dilution (1:5) in tartaric acid solution (9 g/L of
tartaric acid, pH 3.2). Color intensity was calculated as the sum of
A420, A520, A620 values, while the color tonality was assessed by ratio
A420/A520. All analyses were performed in triplicate. Signiﬁcant differences (p < .05) among the three fermentations were tested by
ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey's test, carried out in R environment.

2. Material and methods
2.1. Passito must production
Grapes used for this study were cultivated in Castelvenere
(Benevento province) at an altitude of about 150 m above the sea level
by Geneva Double Courtain (GDC) farmed system, planted
2.40 × 1.40 m. Guyot pruning was carried out by leaving three bosses
in fruit per plant. Soil was characterized by steep slope and mediumlow fertility. The grapes were harvested in the second half of October,
already over-ripened and, precisely, characterized by an average sugar
content of 25.5°Brix. Bunches quality was excellent nevertheless a
further selection was made by removing berries exhibiting small lesions
or evidence of alteration. Grapes were placed in perforated plastic trays
sized 50 × 30 × 20 cm (about 2.5 kg each), covered with a thin nonwoven sheet and brought into the so-called fruttaio: a well-ventilated
drying room. After about one month of withering, a further selection
was carried out by eliminating berries evidently aﬀected by Botrytis not
in the noble form. Before pressing (beginning of March), withered
grapes were subjected to a ﬁnal selection. Bunches were de-stemmed
and lightly crushed before being pressed with a steel mini wine press.
We extracted about 50 L of Passito must starting from 140 Kg withered
grapes (about 35%). The must obtained had the following main features: total sugars, 37°Brix; pH, 3.81; total acidity, 8.9 g/L (expressed as
tartaric acid).

2.4. Microbiological analyses
Must and wine samples were serially diluted in quarter strength
Ringer's solution (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK) and spread-plated (in duplicate) on WL-nutrient agar (Oxoid) supplemented with 100 mg/L of
chloramphenicol and on MRSm1 medium, for yeast and lactic acid
bacteria (LAB) counts, respectively. MRSm1 was developed ad hoc,
adding to 26 g/L of MRS broth (Oxoid) the following ingredients: yeast
extract (5 g/L), fructose (5 g/L), L-cysteine hydrochloride monohydrate
(0.5 g/L), calcium chloride (0.25 g/L), bromocresol green (22 mg/L),
agar (20 g/L), 170 mg/L of cycloheximide and 10 mg/L of pantothenic
acid (all from Sigma-Aldrich). pH was adjusted to 5.2 with 20% malic
acid solution. Plates were incubated at 30 °C for 5 days.

2.2. Fermentations trials
2.5. DNA isolation from must/wines, high-throughput sequencing analysis
(HTS) and data analysis

Must was sulphitated (100 mg/L of potassium metabisulphite) and
divided into six batches. Four batches were inoculated with selected
yeast starters. Speciﬁcally, two batches “S” were added with S. cerevisiae M3–5 (about 106 CFU/mL), previously isolated from Passito of
Moscato di Saracena (Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a); two batches “CZS”
were inoculated with Candida zemplinina T13 (about 106 CFU/mL)
isolated from Aglianico of Taurasi (Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016b) and Zygosaccharomyces bailii NS113 from Falanghina wine (Aliberti, Aponte, &
Blaiotta, 2012), both at a populations level of about 106 CFU/mL, and S.

Total DNA extraction from samples collected at the diﬀerent sampling points was carried out by using the Biostic Bacteremia DNA extraction kit (MoBio Laboratories Inc., Carlsbad, CA), starting from the
pellet obtained from 2 mL of must/wine (10,000 ×g, 2 min). Before
DNA isolation, pellets from the two replicates for each sample, were
joined, washed twice with 1.5 mL of STE (Sodium Chloride-Tris-EDTA,
pH 8.0) buﬀer and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 2 min.
2

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

for each descriptor: frequency of citation of a sensory term and intensity
assigned to it. In this way are properly considered cases in which a term
has been used frequently but with low scores, and cases in which the
same descriptor has been poorly cited but with high scores. Data were
analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and the mean scores for each descriptor
of the three experimental wines were compared by a Tukey t-test
(p < .05) (XLStat 2012.6.02 statistical pocket, Addinsoft Corp., Paris,
France).

The bacterial and eukaryotic diversity were studied through HTS.
Fungal communities were studied by sequencing of a portion (V4 subregion) of the small subunit of ribosomal RNA gene (18S rRNA), using a
recently described primer set (18S-580f/18S-997r) (De Filippis, Laiola,
Blaiotta, & Ercolini, 2017). Library preparation and sequencing on a
454 GS Junior platform were carried out as previously reported (De
Filippis, Laiola, et al., 2017). Bacterial community was studied through
sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene amplicons obtained by using primer S-D-Bact-0341F/S-D-Bact-0785R (Klindworth
et al., 2013). Libraries were prepared and sequenced on an Illumina
MiSeq platform as recently described (Berni Canani et al., 2017).
Paired-end reads were joined by using FLASH (Magoc & Salzberg,
2011).
Quality ﬁltered reads (average quality score below 25, length <
250 or 300 bp, for Bacteria and Fungi, respectively) were then analyzed
and further ﬁltered by using QIIME 1.9.1 software, with a pipeline recently described (Berni Canani et al., 2017). OTUs deﬁned by 97% similarity threshold were identiﬁed by using the Silva SSU/LSU rRNA
gene release 119 for Fungi (Quast et al., 2013) and the Greengenes 13.5
database for Bacteria (McDonald et al., 2012), respectively.
Statistical analyses and plotting were carried out in R environment
(http://www.r-project.org). Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was
carried out on the Log transformed abundance table by using dudi.pca
function in made4 package. Spearman's pairwise correlations were
computed between fungal and bacterial OTU abundance or microbiota
and VOCs (corr.test function in psych package) and plotted by using the
corrplot function. Correction of p-values for multiple testing was performed (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995).
The 18S and 16S rRNA gene sequences are available at the Sequence
Read Archive (SRA) of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI), under accession number SRP149165.

2.7. VOCs analysis
For VOCs extraction, 100 mL of wine were extracted by liquid-liquid
extraction with 5 mL of CH2Cl2 as a solvent spiked with 250 μL of an
alcoholic solution of 2-octanol (258 ppm/EtOH) as internal standard.
The mix was kept under magnetic stirring for 1 h at the constant temperature of 21 °C. After 12 h at 2 °C, the organic phase was recovered
through a separating funnel, dried over Na2SO4, and stored at −20 °C
until the GC/MS analysis. Each extraction was carried out in triplicate.
For High Resolution Gas-Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry
(HRGC/MS) analysis, 2 μL of organic extract were injected in splitless
mode, while the injection port of a GC/MS-QP2010 quadrupole mass
spectrometer (Shimadzu, Shimadzu corp., Kyoto, Japan) was maintained at 250 °C. The GC/MS was equipped with a DB-WAX column
(60 m, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm ﬁlm thickness; J&W Scientiﬁc Inc.,
Folsom, CA 95360, USA). The carrier gas was helium (1.3 mL/min) and
the temperature program used was the following: 40 °C for 5 min, raised
up to 220 °C at a rate of 2 °C/min, and held for 20 min at the maximum
temperature. Electron impact mass spectra were recorded with ion
source energy of 70 eV, while the temperature was kept at 230 °C. The
peak areas were measured using a GC/MS solution program Shimadzu
version 2.30 (Shimadzu corp., Kyoto, Japan). Compounds concentrations and identiﬁcation were computed and performed as previously
reported (Piombino et al., 2010). In a few cases, the pure chemical
standard was not available, and the identiﬁed compounds were labelled
as tentative (t). Signiﬁcant diﬀerences among the wines were tested by
ANOVA (p < .05) performed with the XLStat 2012.6.02 statistical
pocket (Addinsoft Corp., Paris, France).

2.6. Sensory analysis
A quantitative descriptive sensory analysis (QDA) of the experimental wines was performed. The odour proﬁles (orthonasal evaluation) were obtained employing apanel composed of 8 judges (4 males
and 4 females, 21 to 48 years old). They were recruited from the staﬀ
and the students of the Department of Agricultural Sciences of the
University of Naples Federico II, selected on the basis of their sensory
abilities, trained in recognize and describe odours (chemical standards),
in performing sensory descriptive analysis of wine and with extensive
experience in sensory descriptive analyses of various wine typologies
including sweet wines. Thirty mL of each wine were served at 10 °C in
black tulip-shaped glasses, coded with random three-digit codes.
Samples were evaluated in duplicate (two duplicate sessions). Each
judge evaluated all the wines in each session and the wines were served
according to a randomized service design. The judges were asked to
focus on the perceived odour descriptors and rate the corresponding
intensities on a 9- point scale (1 = very weak, 2 = weak, 3 = medium,
4 = strong, 5 = very strong, half values being allowed). They were
provided with a list of 25 odour descriptors (the order was randomized
among the judges) associated with sweet wines (Reboredo-Rodríguez,
González-Barreiro, Rial-Otero, Cancho-Grande, & Simal-Gándara,
2015). Furthermore, under the item “More” the judges had the opportunity to add and rate descriptors eventually perceived and not included in the list.
Only the descriptors cited at least 4 times (citation frequency ≥ 50%) in one sample and one repetition were retained for data
elaboration. Sensory data were computed as the geometric mean of
frequency and mean intensity (Mean Sensory Modiﬁed Frequency - MF)
as described by Dravnieks (1982): MF = (F * I)1/2; where F is the frequency of citation expressed as a percentage of the maximum frequency
of citation (i.e. total number of judges) and I is the mean intensity expressed as a percentage of the maximum rate (i.e. the value of 5). This
method takes into account both types of values produced by assessors

3. Results and discussion
Viable yeasts in uninoculated, sulphitated must (sample N, t0) were
about 4.4 Log CFU/mL at the beginning of the fermentation, thus lower
than those usually recorded for other passito musts (5–6 Log CFU/mL),
such as “Vino cotto”, “Vinsanto”, “Mondeuse Black” and “Erbaluce”
(Alessandria et al., 2013; Domizio et al., 2007; Rantsiou et al., 2013;
Tofalo et al., 2009). This may be due to the high quality of the sun dried
berries used, that were manually selected.
As expected, in inoculated batches (S and CZs), fermentation started
with a higher level of viable yeasts: 6.0 ± 0.01 and 6.8 ± 0.06 Log
CFU/mL in S and CZS, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). After
4 days of fermentation, yeasts reached about 8 Log CFU/mL in both S
and CZS trials, and then remained quite stable up to 20 days of fermentation (Supplementary Table 1). From the 20th day on, the yeast
microﬂora in inoculated fermentations showed a diﬀerent behavior:
both experienced a drop, but the decline was faster in CZS if compared
to S (Supplementary Table 1). In sample N, yeast microﬂora reached
about 7 Log CFU/mL after one week and did not change signiﬁcantly up
to 44 days (Supplementary Table 1; 7.2–6.5 Log CFU/mL). At the end of
monitoring (66 days), yeasts were below one Log CFU/mL in starter-led
fermentations, while they reached about 4 Log CFU/mL in the natural
fermentation (Supplementary Table 1). In all batches, LAB were undetectable (< 10 CFU/mL) up to the 66th day (Data not shown). Just
few cycloheximide-resistant yeast colonies were retrieved on MRSm1
agar plates used for LAB counting (Data not shown).
A culture-independent approach, based on HTS analyses, was applied to monitor both fungal and bacterial communities during
3

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

Fig. 1. Stacked bar showing the eukaryotic populations in Passito musts and wines analyzed in this study: N, natural fermentation; S, samples inoculated with S.
cerevisiae; CZS, samples inoculated with C. zemplinina, Z. bailii, S. cerevisiae.

zemplinina increased from 44 to 66 days (Fig. 1). The persistence, until
the end of the fermentation, of Candida, Zygosaccharomyces and Pichia
was also shown in Vinsanto and Vincotto passito wines by Domizio et al.
(2007) and Tofalo et al. (2009), respectively.
Bacterial community was dominated by Proteobacteria and
Actinobacteria, while Firmicutes showed lower levels (Supplementary
Fig. 1). Most abundant genera in all the fermentations included Methylobacterium, Sphingomonas, Propionibacterium and Acinetobacter. Previous HTS analyses of the grapevine phyllosphere, ﬂowers and grape
berry surface, demonstrated that the bacterial communities were predominated by Proteobacteria followed by Firmicutes, Actinobacteria,
Acidobacteria, and Bacteroidetes (Morgan et al., 2017). In our fermentations Propionibacterium and Staphylococcus showed an increasing
trend up to 66 days. Acinetobacter reached abundance > 10% in N fermentation after 29 days, while it developed faster in S (11.3% at
13 days) and CZS (16.9% at 20 days). Acinetobacter as well as other
bacterial genera including Methylobacterium, Sphingomonas, Pseudomonas, Wolbachia, and Paracoccus were detected until the end of alcoholic fermentation in previous studies (Bokulich, Joseph, Allen, Benson,
& Mills, 2012; Portillo & Mas, 2016). A low abundance of both LAB and
acetic acid bacteria was shown during fermentations (Supplementary
Fig. 1). Similar results were previously reported (Bokulich et al., 2012).
Among LAB, Lactobacillus and Streptococcus occurred in all fermentation
phases, while the other genera were found sporadically only. Both
Gluconobacter and Gluconacetobacter were often found, while Acetobacter was never detected.
Finally, we evaluated the co-occurrence pattern between bacterial
and fungal communities (Supplementary Fig. 2). Acinetobacter signiﬁcantly (FDR < 0.05) co-excluded with ﬁlamentous fungi (Sclerotinia, Cladosporium), while Methylobacterium and Sphingomonas showed
an opposite correlative pattern. S. cerevisiae co-occurred with Streptococcus spp. and C. zemplinina showed only one signiﬁcant negative
correlation with Pseudomonas.
Consequently, diﬀerent kinetics in sugars consumption, were detected along the three fermentations (Supplementary Table 1). Must at
t0 showed a level of total sugars of about 400 g/L (388–397 g/L).
Fermentation N showed a one week long lag phase, since during this
period only 21 g/L of sugars were consumed. By contrast, S and CZs
fermentations promptly began, and > 100 g/L of sugars were consumed
in the same time frame: about 105 and 137 g/L, in S and CZS,

fermentations. HTS technologies have become the tool of choice in
deciphering both vineyard and wine microbiome (De Filippis, La Storia,
& Blaiotta, 2017; De Filippis, Parente, & Ercolini, 2018; Morgan, du
Toit, & Setati, 2017). These technologies have revealed more ﬁlamentous fungal species than yeast species especially those associated
with the grape berry surface, and a higher diversity compared to other
culture-independent methods (Morgan et al., 2017).
In this study, ﬁlamentous fungi, such as Aureobasidium,
Cladosporium and Sclerotinia spp., prevailed in all the samples at the
beginning of the fermentation (Fig. 1). These genera are part of the
fungal microbiota of Vitis vinifera showing diﬀerent types of life modes
(pathogen, endophyte, saprotroph) and are responsible for diseases like
“Fruit rot” and “Shoot blight” (Jayawardena et al., 2018). A high occurrence of Aureobasidium (A.) pullulans was also shown by Alessandria
et al. (2013) during on-vine withering of Mondeuse black cultivar winegrapes by culture-dependent methods. However, A. pullulans is a technologically irrelevant species that as soon as the fermentation started
has disappeared (Alessandria et al., 2013; this study Fig. 1).
Yeasts retrieved in sample N at time 0 included Hanseniaspora (H.)
uvarum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S.), Metschnikowia fructicola, Candida
(C.) etchellsii, Hanseniaspora vineae, Debaryomyces (D.) hansenii. Also
other yeast genera were previously retrieved in natural musts from
dehydrated grapes, such as Pichia, Zygosaccharomyces, and
Kluyveromyces (Alessandria et al., 2013; Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a;
Domizio et al., 2007; Tofalo et al., 2009). Besides other factors, the
higher sugar content (about 400 g/L) may explain the diﬀerent microbial composition of our passito must compared to that previously reported.
About 20% of S. cerevisiae was found in sample S at time 0, while its
abundance was about 10 times lower in CZS, consistent with the starter
inoculum (Fig. 1). Both C. zemplinina and Zygosaccharomyces (Z.) bailii
were found at t0 only in CZS. Naturally fermented samples showed a
diﬀerent fungal community and clearly clustered apart from the inoculated samples (Fig. 2). S. cerevisiae prevailed in both the inoculated
fermentations after 4 days, but Z. bailii was still detectable in CZS until
20 days, as well as C. zemplinina, which increased in abundance at the
end of the fermentation. Higher diversity was found in natural fermentation. It was mainly carried out by H. uvarum and H. vinae until
29 days, when S. cereviasiae abundance started increasing. Moreover, Z.
rouxii persisted from day 13th until the end of the process and C.
4

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

Fig. 2. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) based
on eukaryotic community composition. The two
principal components were plotted using the vegan
package in R. Samples were coloured according to
the type of inoculum: blue, natural fermentation (N);
green, S. cerevisiae (S); red, C. zemplinina, Z. bailii, S.
cerevisiae (CZS). (For interpretation of the references
to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to
the web version of this article.)

(20–23 g/L) but very diﬀerent fructose concentration (121 g/L in S and
85 g/L in CZS) at the end of fermentation (Supplementary Table 1).
Kinetics of ethanol production substantially reﬂected those of sugar
depletion (Supplementary Table 1). Wines showed variable ethanol
content, with the lowest value in N (8.9 ± 0.4%, v/v) and the highest
in CZS (16.5 ± 0.2%, v/v). Ethanol yield, namely the ratio ethanol/
sugar consumed (g/g) was variable as well: 0.42, 0.48 and 0.46 in N, S
and CZS, respectively. As expected, glycerol was already detectable in
musts at the beginning of fermentation, with values ranging from
3.0 ± 0.2 in CZS to 3.6 ± 0.2 g/L in S (Supplementary Table 1).
Indeed, due to water loss stress, the cell metabolism of dehydrated
grape shift from aerobic to anaerobic and the osmotic potential due to
higher sugar levels improve the synthesis of glycerol together with
acetic acid (Cirilli et al., 2012). Although the glycerol content of wines
at 66 days did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly (14.2–14.5 g/L), diﬀerent production kinetics were highlighted depending on the fermentation: glycerol was produced mainly during the ﬁrst week in S and CZS, while it
reached the same value in the natural fermentation N after 20 days
(Supplementary Table 1). This suggest that in the inoculated musts,
yeast cells were able to quickly counteract osmotic stress, by producing
glycerol at higher rates in order to limit water loss from the cytoplasm
and prevent dehydration of the yeast (Erasmus, van der Merwe, & van
Vuuren, 2003). Acetic acid was low (0.18–0.24 g/L) in musts, but
reached levels ranging from 1.15 ± 0.07 in N to 1.39 ± 0.07 g/L in S
after 66 days (Supplementary Table 1). Moreover, regarding acid acetic
content, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found between S and CZS
wines. The concentration of acetic acid may seems too high compared
to others passito wine previously studied such as Vinsanto, Amarone,
Mondeuse Blanck and Moscato of Saracena (Alessandria et al., 2013;
Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a; Azzolini et al., 2013; Domizio et al., 2007).
However, the acetic acid produced during alcoholic fermentation

respectively. Such diﬀerence in sugar consumption (about 30–40 g/L)
between fermentations S and CZS continued until 66th days and could
be ascribed to the fructophilic character of some yeasts inoculated in
CZS. Finally, all the samples at 66 days were characterized by diﬀerent
residual sugar content: 230, 144 and 105 g/L for N, S and CZS, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). High residual sugar is a typical
feature of most wines obtained from over-ripened/dehydrated grapes
(Alessandria et al., 2013; Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a; Domizio et al.,
2007; Moio & Piombino, 2013; Rantsiou et al., 2012; Tofalo et al.,
2009). However, also dry wines with low residual sugars can be produced from passito musts by using technological and/or microbiological
tools such as starter cultures (Alessandria et al., 2013; Azzolini et al.,
2013). Diﬀerences in the residual sugars of this type of wine can be
mainly related to the initial sugar content of musts that generally ranges
from around 280 g/L (eg. Vinsanto must; Domizio et al., 2007) to about
400 g/L (Erbaluce must; Rantsiou et al., 2012), similarly to that used in
this study.
The fructose/glucose ratio (F/G) at the onset of the fermentation
was that typical of over ripened grapes: 1.16 ± 0.02 (Supplementary
Table 1). In spontaneous fermentation N, such value remained unchanged until the day 13th, then slightly increased up to 2 at the day
66th. On the other hand, F/G ratio showed a similar trend in both yeastinoculated trials, reaching values around 2 after 20 days. Values signiﬁcantly diverged later, reaching 4.2 and 5.2 at the end of monitoring,
in CZS and S respectively (Supplementary Table 1). The lower F/G ratio
in CZS compared to S may be related to the occurrence of C. zemplinina
in the starter culture. In fact, as reported by Rantsiou et al. (2012) and
Aponte and Blaiotta (2016b), C. zemplinina strains are characterized by
a higher consumption of fructose than glucose, and some strains show a
total fructophilic character. Data obtained in this study further conﬁrm
this behavior. Indeed, S and CZS wines showed similar glucose content
5

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

S resulted as the richest in esters, followed by CZS (−5.8%) and
then by N (−32%).
S and CZS were both richer in ethyl esters compared to N, but ethyl
hexanoate, ethyl octanoate and ethyl decanoate were higher in S.
Acetates were higher in N, where isoamyl acetate and β-phenylethyl
acetate, two important wine odour-active molecules, were around two
or twenty times more concentrated compared to S and CZS. Ethyl vanillate was detected only in S and CZS.
Three aldehydes linked to the lipoxygenase activity were identiﬁed.
The two saturated, hexanal and heptanal, showed the same concentration in N, S and CZS, while the unsaturated cis-3-hexenal was
detected only in S. The concentration of benzaldehyde was signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by yeasts conducting the alcoholic fermentation, with the
highest amount detected in S, followed by CZS (−16%) and ﬁnally N
(−46%).
Among ketones, 2-pentanone was detected only in N. Other two
ketones directly related to the alcoholic fermentation were detected in
the three wines: diacetyl was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent but, comparing
the spontaneous fermentation to the inoculated wines, it showed an
increasing trend; acetoin was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent among the three
samples; however, it was much higher in N compared to S and CZS.
Accordingly, 2,3-butanediol, a compound directly metabolized from
acetoin, showed higher levels in CZS compared to N, in line with the
higher levels of glycerol. Indeed, 2,3-butanediol is linked to yeasts
metabolism and glycerol production, as well as to ethanol oxidation and
acetaldehyde. C. zemplinina could be responsible for the production of
this compound. Indeed, its ability to produce high amount of glycerol
was recently conﬁrmed and associated to the low production of ethanol
and acetic acid (Englezos et al., 2015). However, from a sensory point
of view, we have to consider that both acetoin and 2,3-butanediol have
detection threshold values of about 150 mg/L in wine (Romano & Suzzi,
1996) therefore at the detected levels they cannot inﬂuence the aroma
of any of the studied wines.
γ-Butyrolactone, probably formed by yeast catabolism of glutamic
acid (Wurz, Kepner, & Webb, 1988) was the most abundant lactone in
all samples, with a signiﬁcantly higher concentration in CZS; δ-hexalactone was detected in N and S at similar concentrations, while γnonalactone was present only in N.
The level of total furans importantly diﬀers among the wines, being
CZS the richest both at quantitative and qualitative level, followed by S
(−42%) and ﬁnally N (−89%). Furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural
were the most abundant furans in both the inoculated wines. Sotolon
was detected at concentrations higher than its odour detection
threshold (10 μg/L in wine) in all the wines, at similar levels and with
the highest value in CZS.
Acetals were detected in all the wines and S showed the highest
total amount. 2,4,5-Trimethyl-1,3-dioxolane was the most abundant in
the three samples, while 2-methyl-1,3-dioxane was detected only in N.
The wine CZS was the richest in sulphur compounds. Methionol was
identiﬁed in the three wines at very diﬀerent levels: the highest in CZS,
followed by S (−56%) and then N (−90%). Furthermore, an unknown
thiol was detected in N and CZS but not in S; its concentration was >
3.5 times higher in CZS compared to N.
Linalool, 4-terpineol, α-terpineol and citronellol were identiﬁed in
N and S, while only α-terpineol and citronellol were detected in CZS in
similar amounts.
The odour sensory proﬁles (Fig. 3) of the three wines showed some
diﬀerences that seem in accord with results on VOCs. The three wines
showed common odour traits, namely the dominance of the descriptors
“raisins”, “dry fruits”, “Sherry/Marsala” and “liquor” (Fig. 3). All these
descriptors are commonly elicited in the odour proﬁle of sweet wines
(Piombino et al., 2010; Reboredo-Rodríguez et al., 2015). Despite these
common characteristics, the fermentative microbiota had a signiﬁcant
impact in diﬀerentiating the odour proﬁles of the wines. Indeed, the
CZS wine got signiﬁcantly higher values for the descriptors “plastic/
gum” and “woody”, being woody notes related to the oxidative

should be correlated with both initial sugar content of must and the
sugar consumed during fermentation (ethanol content of wine) also in
relation to the winemaking steps, that can importantly diﬀer in the
production of the mentioned wines. Sugar content of musts used to
produce Vinsanto, Amarone Mondeuse Blanck and Moscato of Saracena
wines was about 300–310 g/L (Alessandria et al., 2013; Aponte &
Blaiotta, 2016a; Azzolini et al., 2013; Domizio et al., 2007), lower than
the must fermented here (400 g/L). Moreover, the fermentation purity
index [(acetic acid g/L)/(ethanol % vol)], as deﬁned by Comitini et al.
(2011), of the wines produced during this study (0.130, 0.092, and
0,075 for N, S and CZS, respectively) supports the idea that mixed
starter cultures including C. zemplinina and Z. bailii could be a means to
manage the alcoholic fermentation in musts from withered grapes. C.
zemplinina strains are osmotolerant and fructophilic and generally
produce low amounts of acetic acid, together with relevant quantities of
glycerol from sugar fermentation (Magyar & Toth, 2011), its presence
in co-culture with S. cerevisiae, consuming sugars at the beginning of
fermentation, contributes to reduce the osmotic stress, therefore reducing production of acetic acid by S. cerevisiae (Rantsiou et al., 2012). Z.
bailii is also considered an osmotolerant species (Martorell, FernàndezEspinar, & Querol, 2005) and often occurs and persists during passito
wine fermentations (Domizio et al., 2007; Tofalo et al., 2009). Rantsiou
et al. (2012) performed laboratory scale fermentations of Erbaluce
dried grape musts (about 400 g/L of total sugars) with 15 diﬀerent
combination of C. zemplinina (5 strains) and S. cerevisiae (3 strains) by
co-inoculum and sequential inoculum. Co-inoculation technique led to
higher production of both ethanol (10.6 to 14.9% v/v) and acetic acid
(0.96–1.62 g/L); by contrast, wine produced through sequential inoculum, were characterized by lower ethanol (7.7 to 11.9% v/v) and
acetic acid (0.37–1.03 g/L). In this study the use of S. cerevisiae M3–5
alone (fermentation S) or in co-inoculum with C. zemplinina T13 and Z.
bailii NS113 (fermentation CZS) allowed production of wines with
higher ethanol content and acceptable acetic acid concentration. S.
cerevisiae M3–5 was isolated from passito wine and previously showed
good performances in high sugar environments in both laboratory scale
fermentation (38°Brix) and during of the fermentation of passito must
(30°Brix) (Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016a).
Lactic acid, detected at 0.31 ± 0.09 g/L in must samples, remained
almost constant until the day 66th reaching 0.27 ± 0.04 (data not
shown). This is in accordance with the low occurrence of LAB in all
samples analyzed by HTS.
Finally, wines presented diﬀerent color features (data not shown). N
wines showed the highest intensity (0.544 ± 0.001) coupled to the
lowest hue (2.278 ± 0.016); by contrast, CZS wines exhibited the
lowest
intensity
(0.283 ± 0.001)
and
the
highest
hue
(3.146 ± 0.031).
Mean concentrations of volatiles quantiﬁed by GC/MS in the wines
are reported in Supplementary Table 2. The three wines diﬀered in their
volatile proﬁles: diﬀerences in total alcohols, acids and esters suggest a
diverse course of the fermentation process. N was the richest in alcohols
and the poorest in acids and esters, while S and CZS were quite similar
in terms of total amount of VOCs belonging to these chemical classes.
The concentration of 3-methyl-1-butanol and 2-phenylethanol,
which are the main alcohols produced during the alcoholic fermentation, diﬀered in the three wines, reaching the highest levels in N and the
lowest in CZS. Although signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in their concentrations,
alcohols linked to the enzymatic oxidation of fatty acids, 1-hexanol and
3-hepten-1-ol, showed comparable levels in the three wines.
Diﬀerently, 2,3-butanediol was signiﬁcantly higher in CZS. Finally, 4penten-1-ol was not detected in N, while 4-methyl-1-pentanol was detected only in S.
The lowest levels of each of the identiﬁed volatile acids were detected in N. Isovaleric and 9-decenoic acids showed the highest concentrations in CZS, while isobutyric, hexanoic and octanoic acids in S;
the amounts of propanoic, decanoic and dodecanoic acids were similar
in S and CZS.
6

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

Fig. 3. Odour proﬁles of the experimental Falanghina sweet passito wines (Mean Sensory Modiﬁed Frequency %).

4. Conclusions

evolution of wine (Escudero, Asensio, Cacho, & Ferreira, 2002), while N
wine received signiﬁcantly higher scores for “solvent/chemical” and
“ﬂoral” descriptors. The chemical odour of sweet wines has been previously associated to higher alcohols (Ruiz, Zea, Moyano, & Medina,
2010), while terpenes are the major responsible for ﬂoral notes (Del
Caro et al., 2012; Genovese, Gambuti, Piombino, & Moio, 2007).
The major persistence of Aureobasidium pullulans and the clear
dominance of Hanseniaspora spp. in wine N may be related to both
higher alcohols and terpenes production. Increased concentration of
higher alcohols have been previously observed by several authors in
diﬀerent wines fermented by non-Saccharomyces yeast (Herjavec,
Podgorski, Redzepovic, & Mirosevic, 2003; Varela et al., 2009; Vilanova
& Sieiro, 2006) having a very active synthetic or Ehrlich pathway for
aminoacids metabolism. Moreover, a recent study (Davis, Boundy-Mills,
& Landolt, 2012) showed that the major headspace volatiles emitted by
Aureobasidium pullulans isolated from apples, were 2-methyl-1-butanol,
3-methyl-1-butanol, and 2-phenylethanol.
The higher concentration of 2-phenylethanol and terpenes (linalool,
4-terpineol, α-terpineol and citronellol) in N, could also be ascribed to
the hydrolysis of odourless aroma precursors, as a consequence of the
high β-glucosidases activity of non-Saccharomyces yeasts driving the
natural fermentation (Varela et al., 2009).
The “plastic/rubber” descriptors were signiﬁcantly more perceivable in CZS which was the wine richest in sulphur compounds. Sulphur
compounds may be synthesised by yeasts and are associated with unpleasant notes like rubber, garlic and cabbage (Swiegers, Bartowsky,
Henschke, & Pretorius, 2005). High sulphur compounds production has
been previously associated to Star. bacillaris strains (synonym Candida
zemplinina) (Aponte & Blaiotta, 2016b). Moreover, the woody notes
were perceived as stronger in CZS and this could be related to its higher
furans concentration. Indeed, furfural was correlated with the “cooked
vegetables” descriptor and could also contribute to the “woody note” of
aged wines (Escudero et al., 2002). Wine sugars may be converted to
furfural, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, and other correlated volatiles
through acid-catalyzed degradation, a pathway of particular importance to sweet wines (Waterhouse, Sacks, & Jeﬀrey, 2016). Furfural
has also been identiﬁed as being one of the compounds linked with the
tendency of wine to brown (Ferreira, Escudero, Fernańdez, & Cacho,
1997). The woody notes and higher furans concentration in CZS lead to
suppose that in this wine a stronger oxidation process occurred. This
hypothesis, is also supported by color parameters above reported: CZS
wines exhibited the highest hue.

This study is the ﬁrst describing the impact of microbial community
on both physico-chemical parameters and odour active compounds in
passito wines produced from Falanghina wine-grapes cultivar.
Indigenous yeasts of the fresh must are often inadequate or too stressed
by the high osmotic conditions of the must (hyperosmotic shock) to
eﬃciently carry out the fermentative process, leading to a low-quality
wine (high residual sugar content, low alcohol content and with high
“solvent/chemical” notes). The use of selected starter cultures, especially if acclimated to the high sugar environment, is conﬁrmed as an
optimal solution for passito wines production. Moreover, the co-inoculum of osmotolerant C. zemplinina and Z. bailii with S. cerevisiae is
conﬁrmed a good solution for production passito wines with higher
ethanol and relative lower acetic acid. However, the wine produced by
mixed starter cultures, during this study, was rich in sulphur compounds and some negative descriptors as “plastic/gum” and “woody”
were highly perceived.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2018.11.033.
Fundings
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
References
Alessandria, V., Giacosa, S., Campolongo, S., Rolle, L., Rantsiou, K., & Cocolin, L. (2013).
Yeast population diversity on grapes during on-vine withering and their dynamics in
natural and inoculated fermentations in the production of icewines. Food Research
International, 54, 139–147.
Aliberti, A., Aponte, M., & Blaiotta, G. (2012). Molecular and technological characterization
of yeasts isolated from Falanghina grapes of diﬀerent origin (Benevento, Campi Flegrei,
Vesuvio). III conference SIMTREA, 26–28 June, Bari (Italy).
Aponte, M., & Blaiotta, G. (2016a). Selection of an autochthonous Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain for the viniﬁcation of “Moscato di Saracena”, a southern Italy (Calabria
Region) passito wine. Food Microbiology, 54, 30–39.
Aponte, M., & Blaiotta, G. (2016b). Potential role of yeast strains isolated from grapes in
the production of Taurasi DOCG. Frontiers in Microbiology, 7, 809.
Azzolini, M., Tosi, E., Faccio, S., Lorenzini, M., Torriani, S., & Zapparoli, G. (2013).
Selection of Botrytis cinerea and Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains for the improvement
and valorization of Italian passito style wines. FEMS Yeast Research, 13, 540–552.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B:
Statistical Methodology, 57, 289–300.
Berni Canani, R., De Filippis, F., Nocerino, R., Laiola, M., Paparo, L., Calignano, A., ...
Ercolini, D. (2017). Speciﬁc signatures of the gut microbiota and increased levels of
butyrate in children treated with fermented cow's milk containing heat-killed
Lactobacillus paracasei CBA L74. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 83,

7

Food Research International xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx

F. De Filippis et al.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Food Microbiology, 28, 94–100.
Martorell, P., Fernàndez-Espinar, M. T., & Querol, A. (2005). Molecular monitoring of
spoilage yeasts during the production of candied fruit nougats to determine food
contamination sources. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 101, 293–302.
McDonald, D., Price, M. N., Goodrich, J., Nawrocki, E. P., De Santis, T. Z., Probst, A., ...
Hugenholtz, P. (2012). An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for
ecological and evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. The ISME Journal, 6,
610–618.
Moio, L., & Piombino, P. (2013). Management of viniﬁcation and stabilization to preserve
the aroma characteristic of dehydrated grape. In F. Mencarelli, & P. Tonutti (Eds.).
Sweet, reinforced and fortiﬁed wines: Grape Biochemistry, Technology and Viniﬁcation,
Whiley online library (pp. 131–144). .
Morgan, H. H., du Toit, M., & Setati, M. E. (2017). The grapevine and wine microbiome:
Insights from high-throughput amplicon sequencing. Frontiers in Microbiology, 8, 820.
Piombino, P., Genovese, A., Gambuti, A., Lamorte, S. A., Lisanti, M. T., & Moio, L. (2010).
Eﬀects of oﬀ-vine bunches shading and cryomaceration on free and glycosilated
ﬂavours of Malvasia delle Lipari wine. International Journal of Food Science and
Technology, 45(2), 234–244.
Portillo, M. C., & Mas, A. (2016). Analysis of microbial diversity and dynamics during
wine fermentation of Grenache grape variety by high-throughput barcoding. LWT Food Science and Technology, 72, 317–321.
Quast, C., Pruesse, E., Yilmaz, P., Gerken, J., Schweer, T., Yarza, P., ... Glöckner, F. O.
(2013). The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: Improved data processing
and web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Research, 41(D1), D590–D596.
Rantsiou, K., Campolongo, S., Alessandria, V., Rolle, L., Torchio, F., & Cocolin, L. (2013).
Yeast populations associated with grapes during withering and their fate during alcoholic fermentation of high-sugar must. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine
Research, 19, 40–46.
Rantsiou, K., Dolci, P., Giacosa, S., Torchio, F., Tofalo, R., Torriani, S., ... Cocolin, L.
(2012). Candida zemplinina can reduce acetic acid produced by Saccharomyces cerevisiae in sweet wine fermentations. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 78, 1987.
Reboredo-Rodríguez, P., González-Barreiro, C., Rial-Otero, R., Cancho-Grande, B., &
Simal-Gándara, J. (2015). Eﬀects of sugar concentration processes in grapes and wine
aging on aroma compounds of sweet wines—A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science
and Nutrition, 55, 1053–1073.
Romano, P., & Suzzi, G. (1996). Origin and production of acetoin during wine yeast
fermentation. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 62, 309–315.
Ruiz, M. J., Zea, L., Moyano, L., & Medina, M. (2010). Aroma active compounds during
the drying of grapes cv. Pedro Ximenez destined to the production of sweet Sherry
wine. European Food Research and Technology, 230, 429.
Swiegers, J. H., Bartowsky, E. J., Henschke, P. A., & Pretorius, I. S. (2005). Yeast and
bacterial modulation of wine aroma and ﬂavour. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine
Research, 11, 139–173.
Tofalo, R., Chaves-Lopez, C., Di Fabio, F., Schirone, M., Felis, G. E., Torriani, S., ... Suzzi,
G. (2009). Molecular identiﬁcation and osmotolerant proﬁle of wine yeasts that
ferment a high sugar grape must. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 130,
179–187.
Varela, C., Siebert, T., Cozzolino, D., Rose, L., McLean, H., & Henschke, P. A. (2009).
Discovering a chemical basis for diﬀerentiating wines made by fermentation with
‘wild’ indigenous and inoculated yeasts: Role of yeast volatile compounds. Australian
Journal of Grape and Wine Research, 15, 238–248.
Vilanova, M., & Sieiro, C. (2006). Contribution by Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast to fermentative ﬂavour compounds in wines from cv. Albarino. Journal of Industrial
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 33, 929–933.
Waterhouse, A. L., Sacks, G. L., & Jeﬀrey, D. W. (2016). Understanding wine chemistry.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2016 (470 pp).
Wurz, R. E. M., Kepner, R. E., & Webb, A. D. (1988). The biosynthesis of certain gammalactones from glutamic acid by ﬁlm yeast activity on the surface of ﬂor sherry.
American Journal of Enology and Viticulture, 39, 234–238.

e01206–e01217.
Bokulich, N. A., Joseph, C. M. L., Allen, G., Benson, A. K., & Mills, D. A. (2012). Nextgeneration sequencing reveals signiﬁcant bacterial diversity of botrytized wine. PLoS
One, 7, e36357.
Cirilli, M., Bellincontro, A., De Santis, D., Botondi, R., Colao, M. C., Muleo, R., &
Mencarelli, F. (2012). Temperature and water loss aﬀect ADH activity and gene expression in grape berr during postharvest dehydration. Food Chemistry, 132, 447–454.
Comitini, F., Gobbi, M., Domizio, P., Romani, C., Lencioni, L., Mannazzu, I., & Ciani, M.
(2011). Selected non-Saccharomyces wine yeasts in controlled multistarterfermentations with Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Food Microbiology, 28, 873–882.
Davis, T. S., Boundy-Mills, K., & Landolt, P. J. (2012). Volatile emissions from an epiphytic fungus are semiochemicals for eusocial wasps. Microbial Ecology, 64,
1056–1063.
De Filippis, F., La Storia, A., & Blaiotta, G. (2017). Monitoring the mycobiota during
Greco di Tufo and Anglianico wine fermentation by 18S rRNA gene sequencing. Food
Microbiology, 63, 117–122.
De Filippis, F., Laiola, M., Blaiotta, G., & Ercolini, D. (2017). Diﬀerent amplicon targets
for sequencing-based studies of fungal diversity. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 83(17), e905.
De Filippis, F., Parente, E., & Ercolini, D. (2018). Recent past, present, and future of the
food microbiome. Annual Review of Food Science and Technology, 9, 589–608.
Del Caro, A., Fanara, C., Genovese, A., Moio, L., Piga, A., & Piombino, P. (2012). Free and
enzymatically hydrolysed volatile compounds of sweet wines from Malvasia and
Muscat grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) grown in Sardinia. South African Journal of Enology
and Viticulture, 33(1), 115–121.
Domizio, P., Lencioni, L., Ciani, M., Di Biasi, S., Pontremolesi, C., & Sabatelli, M. P.
(2007). Spontaneous and inoculated yeast population dynamics and their eﬀect on
organoleptic characters of Vinsanto wine under diﬀerent process conditions.
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 115, 281–289.
Dravnieks, A. (1982). Odor quality: Semantically generated multidimensional proﬁles are
stable. Sciences, 218, 799–801.
Englezos, V., Rantsiou, K., Torchio, F., Rolle, L., Gerbi, V., & Cocolin, L. (2015).
Exploitation of the non-Saccharomyces yeast Starmerella bacillaris (synonym Candida
zemplinina) in wine fermentation: Physiological and molecular characterizations.
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 199, 33–40.
Erasmus, D. J., van der Merwe, G. K., & van Vuuren, H. J. J. (2003). Genome-wide expression analyses: Metabolic adaptation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to high sugar
stress. FEMS Yeast Research, 3, 375–399.
Escudero, A., Asensio, E., Cacho, J., & Ferreira, V. (2002). Sensory and chemical changes
of young white wines stored under oxygen. An assessment of the role played by aldehydes and some other important odorants. Food Chemistry, 77, 325–331.
Ferreira, V., Escudero, A., Fernańdez, P. E., & Cacho, J. F. (1997). Changes in the proﬁle
of volatile compounds in wines stored under oxygen and their relationship with the
browning process. Z. Lebensm. -Forsch. A, 205, 392–396.
Genovese, A., Gambuti, A., Piombino, P., & Moio, L. (2007). Sensory properties and
aroma compounds of sweet Fiano wine. Food Chemistry, 103, 1228–1236.
Herjavec, S., Podgorski, V., Redzepovic, S., & Mirosevic, N. (2003). The inﬂuence of some
commercial Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains on the quality of Chardonnay wines. Food
Technology and Biotechnology, 41, 77–81.
Jayawardena, R. S., Purahong, W., Zhang, W., Wubet, T., Li, X. H., Liu, M., ... Yan, J.
(2018). Biodiversity of fungi on Vitis viniferaL. revealed by traditional and high-resolution culture-independent approaches. Fungal Diversity, 90, 1–84.
Klindworth, A., Pruesse, E., Schweer, T., Peplies, J., Quast, C., Horn, M., & Glockne, F. O.
(2013). Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and
next-generation sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic Acids Research, 4, e1.
Magoc, T., & Salzberg, S. L. (2011). FLASH: Fast length adjustment of short reads to
improve genome assemblies. Bioinformatics, 27, 2957–2963.
Magyar, I., & Toth, T. (2011). Comparative evaluation of some oenological properties in
wine strains of Candida stellata, Candida zemplinina, Saccharomyces uvarum, and

8

