CHAPTE R 11

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient
Asif Ahmad, Muhammad Kaleem
Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University, Rawalpindi, Pakistan

1 Introduction
There is a direct relationship between epidemiology and food ingredients having their origin
from plants. A growing trend of utilizing novel plant food ingredients as a prophylactic
measure against several ailments is evident from the documented literature. Extraction,
characterization, and utilization of these food constituents are directly associated with
better human health. Among these vital food constituents, β-glucan holds a high position in
plant-based and microbial sources that possess functional properties for industrial products
as well as having several health implications. Chemically, it is a nonstarch polysaccharide
belonging to the carbohydrates family and is composed of long chains of glucose units either
in a branched or in an unbranched fashion. The binding force for these long-chain molecules
are glycosidic linkages among β-d-glucopyranose molecules. Glycosidic linkages among
glucose molecules may vary according to the source of β-glucan. For instance, β-glucan
from cereal sources may have β-(1→3) and β-(1→4) linkages, thus forming a wormlike
β-d-glucopyranose structure. In these cereal sources, β-(1→3) predominantly exists as
cellotriosyl and cellotetraosyl units that constitute approximately 90% of the whole molecular
structure (Ahmad and Anjum 2010; Wood et al., 1994). Most of the chemical properties such
as gel formation can be best explained on 1→3 and 1→4 linkages and are under the control
of specific genes (Schreiber et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2015).
The dietary fiber nature, health benefits, and numerous sources of β-glucan are documented
in the literature. The usage of β-glucan against certain diseases may also vary according
to different sources. Baker’s yeast is an important source of β-glucan that is associated
with lowering of cholesterol and boosting of the immune system. These health-related
benefits have a leading role for the development of dietary supplements from baker’s yeast.
Mushrooms are another source from which β-glucan can be extracted and may be used
for the development of similar dietary supplements. The health-related properties in these
sources are attributed to the presence of β-(1→3) (1→6) linkages and are different from
cereal source linkages that consist of β-(1→3) (1→4) linkages (Ahmad and Ahmed 2011;

Biopolymers for Food Design
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811449-0.00011-6

351

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

352

Chapter 11

Ahmad et al., 2012a). In these sources, glycosidic linkages in the form of β-(1→3) dominate
and may connect approximately 1500 glucose units, whereas the number for β-(1→6)
linkages is comparatively low and may connect about 150 glucose molecules. With reference
to β-glucan from the cell wall of baker’s yeast, the 85% share of 1→3 linkages have more
influence on characteristics and health implications as compared to 1→6 linkages that have a
share of about 15% in the cell walls of these biological sources (Klis et al., 2002). The dietary
fiber nature of β-glucan is responsible for reduction in blood low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol, which is confirmed by animal model studies (Anderson, 1995), as well as in
clinical studies that β-glucan can impart health effects similar to those of other dietary fibers
(Glore et al., 1994). β-Glucan from cereal source with 1→3 and 1→4 linkages provides relief
in coronary heart disease. This kind of β-glucan dietary fiber, along with psyllium fiber and
soy protein, is authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with
coronary heart disease. Regular consumption of barley or oat β-glucan is highly effective in
reducing total serum and LDL cholesterol. Especially, barley β-glucan is highly effective in
reducing postprandial glucose levels and modifying endocrine response related to digestion
and absorption of sugars and glucose (Jenkins et al., 2002).
β-Glucan is well known for its water holding, stabilizing, and texturing properties. Use
of β-glucan in selective products as a fat replacer provides a way to develop products for
weight watchers and diabetic patients. This will not only increase the range of food products
for specialty use but also provide some health benefits to the general population. Regular
consumption of β-glucan-containing foods also showed positive effects in coronary heart
disease, diabetes, and hypercholesteremic conditions (Ahmad et al., 2009a; Yokoyama
et al., 1997). The major health benefits are attributed to high viscosity introduced by β-glucan
in the small intestine, and sometimes this intake is associated with appetite suppression.
The viscous behavior of β-glucan in vivo and in vitro is highly associated with its molecular
weight and chain length. In general, long-chain high-molecular-weight β-glucan has a
tendency to form viscous gels due to the complex arrangement of the chains from mixed
linkages (Vaikousi et al., 2004). Solubility and water holding capacity are other important
factors in addition to molecular weight that may affect the viscosity and flow behavior of
β-glucan. β-Glucan from barley has a capacity to form highly viscous gels of pseudoplastic
nature. This pseudoplastic nature of barley β-glucan offers great resistance to digestion in the
small intestine of human beings and other monogastric animals. High-viscosity pseudoplastic
gels also aid in reduction of serum cholesterol, regulation of insulin secretion, and glucose
absorption (Jenkins et al., 2002).
Based on documented health benefits of β-glucan from various sources, there is a growing
trend of utilization of β-glucan in value-added nutraceutical food products and supplements.
Most of the interest in developing new products originates owing to positive impacts on
metabolic parameters’, tendency to combat chronic diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular
conditions, and cancer. Currently, functional and nutraceutical foods that address these

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

353

chronic problems are limited in number, but the number of sufferers from these problems is
increasing day by day. This is the driving force behind the ever growing market of β-glucancontaining products. The development of β-glucan-containing functional foods will be of
paramount importance in the present era for diabetic, cardiovascular, and cancer patients
(Ahmad et al., 2012b; American Diabetes Association, 1999; Ho et al., 2016).
Apart from nutritional benefits of β-glucan that have implications for health, this valuable
ingredient is also popular in the food industry owing to several industrial important
properties. Some of these properties include provision of thickness to products, emulsification
properties, water holding capacity, texturizing power, stabilizing properties, and gelation
(Ahmad and Anjum, 2010). All of these properties along with several others define the
suitability of β-glucan for incorporation into bread, soups, cookies, sauces, noodles,
beverages, and other food products (Ahmad et al., 2008; Burkus and Temelli, 2000).
Although β-glucan from various sources may be incorporated to develop these products,
cereal β-glucan is the preferred and easily available source for application in food products.
Among cereals, barley and oat β-glucan is more explored for this purpose as it imparts a
better mouth feel and texture to previously mentioned food products with the provision of
ample amounts of dietary fiber. β-Glucan from these two sources may be used to replace
conventionally used stabilizers and thickeners such as gum arabic, carrageenan, modified
starches, alginates, modified celluloses, pectin, xanthan gum, and guar gum. Based on
the aforementioned arguments, β-glucan as a food ingredient has a greater potential to
be used in numerous products that may extend from cereal-based products to meat-based
products. It is equally good for beverages, pasta, noodles, sausages, yogurts, cakes, breads,
soups, confectionary products, and many more (Ahmad and Ahmed, 2011; Skouroliakou
et al., 2016; Temelli et al., 2004).

2 β-Glucan From Different Sources
With the progress in research, scientists have discovered new sources of β-glucan.
Conventionally, cereal is perhaps the oldest source from which β-glucan has been extracted,
or these sources in unpurified form have been used for the development of food products.
Apart from conventional cereal sources, β-glucan is now extracted from yeast, algae, molds,
mushrooms, bacteria, and marine animals. These sources along with their β-glucan content
are briefly presented in Table 11.1. A brief account of these sources with respect to β-glucan
is explained in following sections.

2.1 β-Glucan From Cereal Sources
Barley, oats, rye, and rice are the common cereals that have been under research focus
for the extraction of β-glucan. However, barley and oats are considered richer in terms of
β-glucan, having β-glucan content of 4%–7%. Hull-less varieties of barley are recognized as

354

Chapter 11
Table 11.1: Sources of β-glucan and its content.
Sources

β-Glucan Content (%)

Beans
Canary seeds
Corn/maize
Flax
Lentils
Millet
Peas
Rice
Rye
Spelt
Spring wheat
Winter wheat
Hull-less barley
Barley
Oat
Barley mutant (HiAmi x Cheri) x Cheri

2.4–3.5
1.1–2.3
0.1–1.3
0.3–0.7
0.4–1.1
0.5–1.0
0.3–0.7
0.4–0.9
0.7–2.4
0.6–1.1
0.4–1.4
3.7–11
5–10
5–10
3–7
7–12

Source: Ahmad, A., Munir, B., Muhammad, A., Shaukat, B., Muhammad, A., Tahira, T., 2012b.
Perspective of β -glucan as functional ingredient for food industry. J. Nutr. Food Sci. 2(2), 133–139.

having more β-glucan content than normal barley and may range up to 10%–13% β-glucan.
In general, β-glucan is concentrated in bran and endosperm cell walls of oats and barley.
Within the same cereal source β-glucan content may vary from cultivar to cultivar and also
be influenced by environmental factors. In barley, waxy cultivars contain more amylose
and β-glucan. Strong interaction between cultivars and environmental factors suggests that
suitable cultivars should be selected for a specific region to have higher β-glucan content
than the respective cereals source. Cereal β-glucan is characterized as having 1→3 and 1→4
glycosidic linkages and is often referred to as mixed linkages β-glucan (Fig. 11.1). Although
β-glucan from oats and barley appeared similar in chemical nature, they differ slightly in their
functional properties. The oat bran and endosperm part of the kernel is also a rich source of
β-glucan, and its concentration during extraction can be further increased at the purification
step that focuses on removal of starches. The nature of oat β-glucan is inclined toward soluble
dietary fibers that resist digestion in the small intestine and extend a feeling of satiety.
The US FDA (1997) approved the claim that oat β-glucan is effective in reducing the
cholesterol level of plasma and lowering the risk of heart disease. A similar move was
adopted by the UK Joint Health Claims Initiative (JHCI) to recognize oat β-glucan for
cholesterol-lowering health benefits. These agencies recommended a dose of 3 g oat β-glucan
on a daily basis to reduce LDL cholesterol and total cholesterol (Ahmad et al., 2009a, 2012b).
Rye is another cereal source from which β-glucan can be extracted but at lower levels.
β-Glucan from this source is difficult to extract at this time, and more research is required
to develop feasible extraction techniques for the extraction of β-glucan from rye. Alkali

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

355

Figure 11.1: Chemical Structure for Cereal β-Glucan.
*, Sequence of glucose molecules continues with corresponding glycosidic
linkages in the polysaccharide chain.

extraction techniques will have better prospects to extract β-glucan from this source (Tosh
et al., 2004). A similar situation exists for wheat, which contains lesser amounts of β-glucan,
and extraction is still a problem from this source (Hollmann and Lindhauer, 2005). Inglett
et al. (2004) developed a technique for extraction of β-glucan from rice, and commercialized
the product with the name of Ricetrim.

2.2 β-Glucan From Mushrooms
In Asian countries, mushrooms and mushroom-derived materials have been used for
centuries for health purposes. These mushrooms are good sources of dietary fibers,
β-glucan, antioxidants, and many other bioactive compounds and are exploited for the
manufacturing of commercial products. β-Glucan extracted from cereal and mushroom
sources has demonstrated health implications and is composed of basic β-d-glucan units
that are arranged differently in cereals (1→3 and 1→4) and in mushrooms (1→3 and 1→6)
(Zhang et al., 2013). In mushrooms, a higher amount of β-glucan is concentrated either
in mycelia or in fruiting bodies. Mushroom sclerotia of Pleurotus tuberregium is a great
source of β-glucan (Zhang et al., 2004). The edible mushroom Termitomyces eurhizus is
another important source of β-glucan that can be extracted using the hot alkaline method
(Banik et al., 2015). Some other researchers used a hot water extraction method instead of
alkaline media to extract β-glucan from the fruiting bodies of edible mushrooms, Pleurotus
eryngii and Pleurotus ostreatoroseus (Carbonero et al., 2006). β-Glucan was extracted
from Penicillium chrysogenum mycelia by Wang et al. (2007). β-Glucan extracted from
these fruiting bodies is effective to enhance the immune system and is used to stimulate the
tumor necrosis factor. Some studies showed its potential against infection through activating
infection-fighting cytokines. Mushroom β-glucan with some other bioactives of mushrooms

356

Chapter 11

provide major protection against DNA damage to lymphocytes. The 1→3 glycosidic
linkages in mushroom β-glucan are supposed to activate the macrophages to kill the diseasecausing cells of pathogens through induction of nitric oxide synthase, tumor necrosis factor,
and macrophage inhibitor proteins. Many more researches are available indicating the
effectiveness of mushroom β-glucan and other allied bioactives against radiation, infection,
and tumors. However, more research is required to understand the mechanism of how the
mushroom β-glucan acts to produce these beneficial effects. Nevertheless, it appears to have
very different actions and activities from oat- and barley-derived β-glucan and dietary fiber
(Ahmad et al., 2012b; Devi et al., 2015).

2.3 β-Glucan From Yeast Cells
Like cereals and mushrooms, the yeast cell wall is also a great source of the βglucan polysaccharides. Several scientists have extracted β-glucan from the cell
walls of yeasts such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Kloeckera apiculata, Meyerozyma
guilliermondii, Debaryomyces hansenii, Laminaria digitata, Zygosaccharomyces bailii,
Pichia membranaefaciens, Kluyveromyces marxianus, Brettanomyces bruxellensis,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Candida milleri. These may be grown on various carbon
sources, including sucrose, glucose, and fructose. Extracted β-glucan from these sources
is composed of repeating units of β-d-glucose that are arranged together via 1→3 linear
linkages, whereas branching originates as 1→6 linkages (Fig. 11.2). Side branching in
yeast β-glucan is an important factor that determine its biological activity. Length of
branched chain and frequency at which this branch originates influence the implications
for biological activity. A higher degree of branching is considered better to achieve
greater biological activity from the extracted β-glucan from these sources (Ahmad and
Anjum, 2010; Carpenter et al., 2013; Nguyen et al., 1998; Solís-Pacheco et al., 2013;
Sweeney et al., 2012).

Figure 11.2: Chemical Structure for Yeast β-Glucan.
*, Sequence of glucose molecules continues with corresponding glycosidic
linkages in the polysaccharide chain.

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

357

2.4 β-Glucan From Bacterial Sources
It is possible to extract β-glucan from the bacterial cell wall. Bacterial cell walls offer
diversified types of β-glucan that may vary from species to species. Chemistry of extracted
β-glucan may range from linear to branched β-glucan. In linear fashion, bacterial β-glucan
may exist as repeating glucose units linked together by β (1→3) linkages, but in branched
form it consists of glucose units having (1→3,1→6) glycosidic linkages. A cyclic form also
exists with branching at 1→2 position to get a chemical structure of (1→3,1→2)-β-glucans.
The production capacity of β-glucan is evident in most of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic
organisms. The biological activity and physiochemical properties of different variants of
bacterial β-glucan may vary. The linear β-glucan that is often documented with the name
of curdlan has good gelling and rheological properties in addition to excellent biological
activity. A variety of bacterial microorganisms may be employed in a fermentation
process to produce linear curdlan. Members belonging to Agrobacterium, Bacillus, and
Pseudomonas are renowned for the production of curdlan. In recent times, a Pseudomonas
species named Pseudomonas sp. QL212 from soil samples appeared as a potential source
of low-molecular-weight curdlan. The low-molecular-weight property of curdlan is
highly associated with increased solubility (Yang et al., 2016). Another species recently
discovered from a Saudi Arabian soil sample is Paenibacillus sp. NBR-10; it is capable
of producing reasonable amounts of curdlan as exopolysaccharide. Sophisticated machine
analysis revealed the chemical nature of this curdlan product as having β-glucose units
linked together with 1→3 glycosidic linkages (El-Sayed et al., 2016). Some of the bacterial
members of the Agrobacterium genus possess high capacity to produce curdlan in the form
of homopolysaccharide with a glycosidic linkage of (1→3)-β-glucans. This type of curdlan
is devoid of branching, and Agrobacterium includes perhaps the most used bacteria for
the scientific studies of curdlan. Among various strains from this group, Agrobacterium
sp. ATCC 31749 has the highest potential to produce curdlan (Wu et al., 2016).

2.5 Other Sources of β-Glucan
Some other plant sources that contain minor amounts of β-glucan are millet (Panicum
miliaceum), beans, corn/maize (Zea mays), flax, canary seed (Tropaeolum peregrinum),
lentil (Lens culinaris), peas, spelt (Triticum spelta), spring wheat, and winter wheat (Ahmad
et al., 2012b; Demirbas, 2005).

3 Structure and Composition of β-Glucan
Chemically, β-glucan is a nonstarch homopolysaccharide associated with cereal grains, but
these are widespread in nature. Great diversity exists in structure and molecular weight of
β-glucan based on its source. Today advancements in research make it possible to distinguish

358

Chapter 11

linear and branched structures, α- and β-anomers, as well as mixed α,β-glucans with various
glycoside bond positions and molecular masses. To enhance purity, substances like proteins,
starches, lipids, minerals, and other polysaccharides need to be removed during extraction
and purification steps. A great number of spectroscopic, chemical, and infrared machine
analysis methods are available for identifying the nature and structure of β-glucan. Among
these, Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy are powerful tools for elucidation of structural features of β-glucans.
Vibrational spectroscopy is most effective to determine structure based on anomeric carbon
of glucans and can be used for purity control as well. Size-exclusion chromatography
along with multiple angular laser light scattering detectors is a useful tool for estimation of
molecular weight for extracted β-glucan (Ahmad et al., 2012a; Synytsya and Novak, 2014).
For fungal β-glucan analysis, organic elemental analysis may provide valuable information
about composition. Extraction of nitrogenous compounds along with fungal β-glucan can
be linked with proteins, amines, and chitosans. These contents along with sugars, uronic
acids, and nitrogenous substances can be determined through chemical analysis and give
an idea about the purity of extracted β-glucan. Use of sophisticated techniques provides
valuable information about homogeneity, molecular weight distribution, and branching and
may include techniques like gel permeation, size-exclusion chromatography, angular laser
light scattering, and viscometry. A detailed sugar profile can be carried out using the gas
chromatographic technique. These samples have to undergo strong acidic conditions for
conversion into respective alditol acetate, and they require elevated temperature. FTIR and
NMR spectroscopy again provide reliable data on the structure of yeast and fungal β-glucans
(Borchani et al., 2016; Vetvicka and Novak, 2013).
In cereals, β-glucan resides within the cell wall of the endosperm and bran part of the kernel.
Barley endosperm contains about 75% of grain β-glucan along with arabinoxylan and minor
proteins. Good sources of β-glucan include oat and barley, but there is little variation in
the β-glucan content of these two cereals (i.e., oat contains 3%–7% whereas barley contain
3%–11% β-glucan) (Skendi et al., 2003). Burkus and Temelli (2000) reported β-glucan
content of oat and barley in the range of 4%–7%. These results are also supported by the
findings of Wood (2002), but several cultivars of oat may contain 6%–7% and some cultivars
of barley contain β-glucan up to 12%. The presence of arabinoxylan and minor proteins
along with β-glucan within the cell wall influence the extraction method. For each extraction
method these are extracted and purification is required to have a higher percentage recovery.
During extraction from cereal source, (1→3) (1→4) β-glucan is the major product, whereas
arabinoxylans and cellulose along with small quantities of vitamins, lipids, proteins, minerals,
phenolic compounds, and antioxidants are impurities (Panfili et al., 2003). Sometimes
other components having nutritional importance are attached with fibers that are capable of
immunopotentiating, whereas others have antioxidant activities. Several minerals in hullless barley and β-glucan content of the hull-less barley correlate with each other. Out of

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

359

these, Ca, Zn, Fe, Cu, Mn, and Se not only are related to β-glucan content but also have
an impact to reduce blood sugar. Similar function is achieved through β-glucan, so these
minerals are complementary to each other, reinforcing their effect if they exist in combination
(Yan et al., 2016). Presence of β-glucan in cereal grain is directly controlled by genetic
and environmental factors. The nature of polysaccharides in barley, oats, wheat, and rye
is variable. For wheat and rye these polysaccharides are in the form of pentosans, whereas
barley and oats are rich in β-glucan polysaccharides. In wheat, arabinoxylan is in the range
of 4%–8%, whereas barley contains 4%–10%. Wheat has β-glucan content of 0.5%–1.0%,
whereas in the case of barley it is 3%–11%. All tissues in barley seedlings except the root cap
have been reported to contain β-glucan. However, β-glucan content in barley increases during
elongation and decreases at the maturation stage. β-Glucan is found in the lowest quantity
in the meristematic tissue as compared to other tissues (Ahmad and Anjum, 2010; Gibeaut
et al., 2005; Yalcın et al., 2007).
Several factors are responsible for variation in β-glucan content of cereal grains grown under
different environmental conditions. The most important are agronomic factors, irrigation,
type of cultivar, and nitrogen fertilizers. Cultivars of barley that are grown in Canada and
the USA contain the highest β-glucan content; similarly, oat cultivars grown in the United
States also have greater content of β-glucan. Oat cultivars grown in Sweden contain the
lowest content of β-glucan (Genc et al., 2001). The effect of environmental and genetic
factors on the β-glucan content of barley that is grown in Australia, Canada, and China was
studied by Zhang et al. (2002). The β-glucan contents of cultivars grown in China are in
the range of 2.98%–8.62%. The Tibet region was unique for cultivation of barley with the
highest amounts of β-glucan. Temperature also influenced the presence of β-glucan content
irrespective of location: Barley cultivars grown during the winter in China showed the same
amounts of β-glucan content as the cultivars grown in Canada and Australia. Similarly,
environmental factors and availability of water at maturation stage also significantly influence
the β-glucan content in cereal grains. A moisture stress just before harvest usually increases
β-glucan levels in grain (Ahmad and Anjum, 2010).

4 Defining Dietary Fiber and Recognition of β-Glucan as Dietary Fiber
One comprehensive definition of dietary fiber proposed by Trowell (1972) is based on
resistance to enzymes digesting the plant cell wall. On the basis of this definition and several
other definitions of dietary fiber that originated later on, β-glucan fulfills the requirements of
these definitions and can therefore be classified as dietary fiber. As research progresses, the
definition of dietary fiber is undergoing dynamic revision. In another definition of dietary
fiber, Stear (1990) proposed a definition declaring polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, lignin,
and associated plant substances to be dietary fibers. During the past two decades there have
been global debates on defining dietary fiber. Codex (1998) presented a more comprehensive

360

Chapter 11

definition of dietary fiber that includes edible parts of plant origin or analogous carbohydrates
that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small intestine with complete
or partial fermentation in the large intestine. A few years later, DeVries presented another
definition of dietary fiber that relates dietary fiber as plant material that is digested by the
microflora of the gut and is not hydrolyzed by the enzymes secreted by the human digestive
system. Components of plants that come under this definition include polysaccharides
that are not starches such as hemicellulose, cellulose, pectins, and gums along with
resistant starches. Vegetables, wheat, and other cereals are good sources of dietary fiber
(DeVries, 2001). At the same time, the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) set up a
special committee to revise the definition of dietary fiber; this Codex Committee on Nutrition
and Foods for Special Dietary Uses (CCNFSDU) reviewed the definition of dietary fiber
and included both edible animal and plant material for defining dietary fiber. However, the
majority of the latest research and reports have shown that dietary fiber is obtained from
plant sources. It was recommended by this committee that the definition of dietary fiber
require an amendment to the current definition (WHO, 2001). A new definition proposed
by the National Academy of Sciences shares the idea of functional fiber and claims that
the total fiber is the sum of dietary fiber and functional fiber. Tungland and Meyer (2002)
defined dietary fiber as a complex of nondigestible carbohydrates and lignin that are intrinsic
and intact in plants, and functional fiber comprises nondigestible carbohydrates that have
beneficial physiological effects in the human body. One year later, the World Health
Organization (WHO, 2003) also supported the idea of intrinsic and added fiber in food. In
2006, CAC again modified the definition of dietary fiber and included the idea of degree of
polymerization (DP). According to this definition, carbohydrates with at least DP value of 3
that are indigestible and unabsorbable in the human small intestine may be included in the
definition of dietary fiber (CAC, 2006). Some modification was made to this definition with
inclusion of a footnote that empowers national authorities to either consider it as dietary fiber
or not (CAC, 2009; Phillips and Cui, 2011). Later on, researchers again finalized another
definition that relates 10 or more monosaccharide units in the polysaccharide structure
and that should not be broken down by the endogenous enzymes in the small intestine of
humans (CAC, 2008, 2015). β-Glucan fulfilled all the requirements of all of these definitions
presented in different eras. Therefore, β-glucan has been recognized as a dietary fiber in all
of these eras.
There are valid incidents that show the activity of β-glucan as dietary fiber. The same health
benefits can be achieved through consumption of β-glucan as from other dietary fibers.
These may include health benefits for diabetic patients due to change in glycemic index
(Schulze et al., 2004), increased frequency of bowel movements (Sanjoaquin et al., 2004)
and relief of constipation, and physiological benefits related to depression of cholesterol
levels and the risk of colon cancer (Ahmad et al., 2009a; Anderson, 1991). To achieve all
of these health-related benefits, WHO recommends consumption of about 25 g dietary fiber
on a daily basis, whereas the FDA recommends 3 g of β-glucan per day. These amounts of

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

361

dietary fiber or β-glucan can be achieved by consumption of fruits, vegetables, oats, barley,
and beans (FDA, 2004; WHO, 2003).
Processing in industrial conditions or fermentation in the large intestine has an effect on
dietary fiber as well as β-glucan. No matter what is the source of β-glucan or dietary fiber, it
undergoes changes during processing as well as by microbial flora in the large intestine. The
actual dietary fiber contents may decrease through conversion into short-chain fatty acids in
the large intestine. Some of the products produced as a result of this fermentation process are
butyrates, lactates, propinonates, and acetates. The processing condition such as fermentation
may affect the dietary fiber contents of the cereals. Under these changes insoluble dietary fiber
undergoes more changes than does soluble dietary fiber from barley and oats. Fewer changes
appeared in the case of oats as compared to other cereals. The soluble fiber and soluble β-glucan
fraction from barley experiences major changes in viscosity and molecular weight during
the fermentation process in large intestine. But oat dietary fiber, including β-glucan, showed
fewer changes in viscosities after the fermentation process and there appeared less change in
molecular weight (Dodevska et al., 2013; Lambo et al., 2005). Production of short-chain fatty
acid in the large intestine by the ingestion of β-glucan and dietary fiber ensures maintenance
of a balance for probiotic and prebiotic strains that have a favorable physiological response in
the human body as well as help to maintain gut health. Consumption of β-glucan causes slow
absorption of nutrients and glucose so important for diabetic patients. The viscosity changes
result in delayed gastric emptying and change in mixing behavior of the intestinal content, thus
modifying the body’s metabolism. Ingestion of β-glucan influences the gut transit rate; this
may help provide relief to constipation patients. The capacity of β-glucan in binding excess bile
acids helps to interact several mutagens and carcinogens for their removal from the body. The
details for anticancer activity of β-glucan are reported by Cheung et al. (2002), who observed
that β-glucan synergizes antitumor activity in xenograft tumor models by the production of
monoclonal antibodies (mAb). Molecular size of β-glucan, as described earlier, also influenced
these activities as an anticarcinogenic agent.

5 β-Glucan Extraction and Purification
The chemistry of sources from which β-glucan can be extracted varies to a high degree;
thus the extraction and purification process may have variation. Many more techniques have
been described in the scientific literature for the extraction and purification of β-glucan from
numerous sources. One of the most used techniques for the extraction of β-glucan is based on
hot water extraction. The basis for this extraction technique is dependent on the solubilization
of β-glucan in extraction media increasing with a rise in temperature up to a certain limit.
Several scientists used this technique for the extraction of β-glucan. In an attempt, Morgan
and Ofman (1998) employed the hot water extraction process with inclusion of a modification
of freeze–thaw cycles. A greater recovery of β-glucan along with a high level of purity can
be achieved using this method. Several other researchers used this technique by combining

362

Chapter 11

Figure 11.3: Extraction of β-Glucan From Oat.
From Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., 2010. Perspective of β-glucan: Extraction and Utilization. VDM Publishers, Germany.

alkaline or acidic extraction from cereal sources mainly from oats (Fig. 11.3). This technique
with the application of high temperature as the sole treatment or in combination of acid or
alkali resulted in higher recoveries of β-glucan. Overall extraction condition and sources under
these techniques showed variation of about 45%–81% recovery (Ahmad and Anjum, 2010;
Burkus and Temelli, 2000). In a similar method of extraction based on temperature, Knuckles
et al. (1997) used consecutive hot water extraction applied in a series employing variable
temperatures in the presence of alkali NaOH that was used at a later stage of extraction. The
authors claimed a high yield of β-glucan in the form of gum material.
Another most used technique for the extraction of β-glucan is an enzymatic process. A
preparation of several enzymes is used to remove impurities that will improve purity and
extraction within the extraction media, while impurities are separated using a centrifugation
process in a series of steps. For that purpose a large number of enzymes that may include
endo-β-(1→3)(1→4) glucanase, feruloyl esterase, endo-xylanases, xyloacetylesterase, and
arabinofuranosidase may be used. Some indigenous enzymes need to be deactivated during
the extraction process, as they can reduce the quantity and quality of extracted β-glucan.

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

363

One of the indigenous enzymes is glucanase, which causes hydrolysis of β-glucan and
increases during germination of the cereal source. Luckily, this enzyme can be deactivated
at elevated temperature. Kanauchi and Bamforth (2001) described a method of β-glucan
extraction using enzymes from outer sources. This method is based on solubilizing the βglucan from cell wall from their source. Some other enzymes that may increase recovery of
β-glucan from the source are lichenase, xylanase, and esterases. Sometimes these enzymes
are used as the sole treatment, but in other cases these may be used along with acid, alkali, or
heat treatment to improve the solubilization of β-glucan. Skendi et al. (2003) made use of a
heat-stable enzyme, termamyl, along with hot water treatment for the extraction of β-glucan
from separate varieties of oats, and reported higher yields of β-glucan by this method. In
a similar method Johansson et al. (2005) employed the same enzyme (termamyl) along
with hot water treatment. This treatment effectively solubilized the β-glucan molecules for
easy separation from the milled grains of oats. In addition to these treatments, the authors
also used isopropanol and petroleum ether as defatting media that resulted in higher yield.
During this extraction method, soluble and insoluble substances can be separated from each
other using high-speed centrifuges. Most of the protein impurities can become insoluble at
their isoelectric point or by use of protein-degrading enzymes and are removed during the
centrifugation process. After removal of impurities, solubilized β-glucan was precipitated by
either ethanol and calcium sulfate. Another enzymatic extraction technique for the extraction
of β-glucan involved boiling and refluxing of grounded oat powder with ethanol. After
defatting, all of the material was suspended in water and heat treated to further inactivate
the indigenous enzymes. In this medium while it was maintained at hot temperature, αamylase (termamyl) preparation that is stable at high temperature was added to degrade
starch impurities. For removal of protein impurities the enzyme pancreatin was used. Finally,
β-glucan was precipitated by slow addition of ethanol until the concentration reached 50%
in the extraction media. High-speed centrifugation at low temperature was carried out to
recover β-glucan (Dongowski et al., 2005). In a similar attempt, Papageorgiou et al. (2005)
recovered β-glucan from barley and oats by adopting an enzymatic process. The slurries of
barley and oat flours were made by maintaining temperature of 50°C followed by removal of
insoluble material through centrifugation. Material was heated with heat-stable amylase for
starch removal followed by centrifugation. Further purification was carried out by addition
of sodium azide during the cooling process. A slightly acidic condition was developed at
this stage, and the mixture was kept overnight at 25°C. After centrifugation, the pH of the
mixture was adjusted to neutral and it was again centrifuged. The water dialysis process
was carried out for 3 days on the supernatant. Finally, ethanol was used to precipitate the
β-glucan. Apart of barley and oat, β-glucan extraction can be carried out from other cereals
using these extraction methods. Homogeneous rye flour having fine and uniform particle size
can be used for extraction of β-glucan. For this purpose the prepared raw material is defatted
using ethanol through continuous refluxing. For removal of starch impurities, thermostable
α-amylase can be used followed by the centrifugation technique (Tosh et al., 2004).

364

Chapter 11

β-Glucan extraction from noncereal sources may vary slightly as the compositions of
these sources are variable in nature. This condition prevails in the case of yeast, molds,
and mushrooms from which β-glucan can be extracted. This kind of β-glucan has
different chemical composition, and alkaline treatment favors this type of extraction. For
the extraction of β-glucan, the cell mass needs to be treated with a high concentration of
alkali (1 M KOH) at low temperature for a long period of time with continuous agitation.
This is followed by an exhaustive centrifugation process to separate supernatant and
residue. The residue material still contains β-glucan, so it needs to be resuspended twice
in the alkaline media for complete separation of β-glucan under the same conditions
of temperature. All of the alkali extracts may be precipitated using ammonium sulfate
by keeping the material overnight at a temperature of 4°C or lower followed by use of
centrifugation at high speed under low temperature to recover β-glucan. This method
is highly effective to recover higher amounts of β-glucan with elevated levels of
purification from the mushroom cell wall (Nguyen et al., 1998). For extraction of βglucan from mycelium of P. chrysogenum, the mycelium was first freeze-dried and then
ground into powder form. In this freeze-dried powder form the material was treated with
alkaline solution for the extraction of β-glucan. In this form NaOH is a more effective
alkali for the extraction of β-glucan. A concentration of 1 M NaOH at 40°C is quite
sufficient to achieve maximum recovery. Freeze-dried powder of mycelia initially treated
with the said concentration of alkali can extract β-glucan but with protein impurities
that need to be separated by the sevage method that works at low pH. After removal of
protein, the pH of the media is again adjusted toward neutral for separation of β-glucan.
Further purification may be achieved through dialysis against distilled water (Wang
et al., 2007).

6 β-Glucan Characterization and Gelation
Growing trends of functional and nutraceutical foods all over the world have major
implications for people’s health. The idea is based on development of food products with
health-promoting active food ingredients that provide some physiological benefits beyond
basic nutrition. The nutritional scientists are striving hard to develop cereal-based, fruitbased, and milk-based nutraceutical products. Among these and several others, the cerealbased nutraceutical products are perhaps at the top of the list. The reason for acceptance
of cereal-based nutraceutical products lies in the presence of diversified macro- and
micronutrients and the use of cereals as staple food, making it ideal for nutrient fortification
programs. Dietary fiber and β-glucan fortification and enrichment from cereal sources is
a novel approach that most nutritionists and food technologists are adopting. These foods
are helpful in the reduction of bowel transit time, reduction of risk of colorectal cancer,
prevention of constipation, and promotion of the growth of beneficial gut microflora (Ahmad
and Anjum, 2010).

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

365

β-Glucan and other dietary fibers have a diversified nature of physiochemical properties
that may be exploited in the food industry. These properties may include solubility, water
holding capacities, foam stability, foaming capacities, and their rheological characteristics.
All of these characteristics vary significantly in different types of dietary fibers and
β-glucan from variable sources. Sometimes water holding capacity in these fibers
represents hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance, change in chemical structure, and particle
size of the fibers. For instance, β-glucan and guar gum have a capacity to form viscous
solutions in the gut, some other fibers may form gel-like structures in the gut, and still
other dietary fibers may have good water absorption power (Tungland and Meyer, 2002).
In human gut conditions, almost all the dietary fibers retain high amounts of water and
act as hydrocolloids, and sometimes dietary fiber rich in insoluble types of dietary fibers
may provide bulk to the stool. These water-insoluble fibers, such as cellulose, have
comparatively low water retention power as compared to soluble dietary fiber of the type
of pectin and guar gum. The water retention power is also important from the point of
view of gut microflora growth and existence. There is a direct relationship between water
holding capacity and penetration of microorganisms in undigested food to ferment in
the large intestine. It is a common phenomenon that β-glucan and dietary fibers having
the capacity to retain more water are quickly fermented by gut microflora (Ahmad and
Anjum, 2010; McIntyre et al., 1991). The barley- and oat-enriched products having more
β-glucan content favor the growth and functioning of microflora in the large intestine that
consume β-glucan and other dietary fibers during fermentation. Such barley and oat may
be added in the cereal products as such or in the form of β-glucan. This addition of βglucan will result in more water retention, improved dough development, viscosity, dough
stability, mixing tolerance index, and other rheological parameters. The bread products
produced by this technique still have high sensory acceptability even up to 15% of barley
flakes addition. This type of fortified bread can be used as a prophylactic product against
several diseases related to gut health (Ahmad et al., 2008; Ahmad and Anjum, 2010;
Kawka et al., 1999).
A water holding capacity of 4–5 g H2O/g sample is considered sufficient to benefit gut health
or industrial processes. Most of the dietary fibers have water-holding capacity in this range.
Barley and oats due to higher β-glucan content have slightly higher water holding capacity.
This is attributed to the nonionic nature of β-glucan from barley and oats that not only
facilitates retention of more water but also provides higher viscosity and weak gel formation
characteristics. Furthermore, the addition of β-glucan from these sources also augments the
emulsion-forming and stabilizing properties. In solution form, β-glucan depicts a low flow
behavior index and a high consistency index in the power law model to support an increase in
viscosities (Ahmad and Anjum, 2010; Drzikova et al., 2005; Kontogiorgos et al., 2004).
Gelling behavior for barley β-glucan is unique as it depicts reversible behavior for gels.
Temperature rise is required to form stable gels, but temperature above 63°C causes

366

Chapter 11

destabilization of these gels. At these temperatures gels start to melt. Sometimes if β-glucan
is used at a low level (0.5%) for gelation purposes, the cooling process causes softness of
gels (Burkus and Temelli, 2000). During this process, gelation time can be reduced if βglucan of higher molecular mass is used (Lazaridou et al., 2003). The dependence of gelling
on molecular weight explains why β-glucan from different sources has variable time for
gelation. Among cereal sources, the gelling ability follows the following order of gelation:
wheat > barley > oat. Gelation is a complex phenomenon, and researchers have presented
various views about gelling of β-glucan. Fincher and Stone (1986) were of the view that
β-glucan gelation initiates with aggregation of β-glucan chains to form a network structure,
whereas Böhm and Kulicke (1999) believed that 1→3 linkages in the form of cellotriose
units of β-glucan are responsible for the gelation phenomenon. Strong linkages in these units
along with some junction points provide the basis for β-glucan gelation. Some researchers
have explained the mechanism of gelation on the basis of the ratio of trisaccharides to
tetrasaccharides. A higher ratio that depicts more cellotriosyl units favors the formation of
β-glucan gels (Lazaridou et al., 2003; Vaikousi et al., 2004).

7 Rheology of β-Glucan
Most industrial processes consider viscosity and rheology as vital parameters. These
parameters are influenced by the presence of β-glucan and hydrocolloids. There are numerous
applications of viscosity at the industrial level. Sometimes processors need higher viscosities,
and sometimes lower viscosity in the product is required. For instance, too much high
viscosity in some products has a negative sensory impact. This is especially important in
beers and some other beverage products in which stabilizers, β-glucan, or hydrocolloids
are added. Similarly, high viscosity in the feed industry is considered a negative practice
and is considered an antinutritional factor (Lyly et al., 2003; Wang et al., 1992). In contrast
to these examples, higher viscosity may be suitable for some industrial products. In these
situations, β-glucan will have great applications as a thickening agent (Wood, 1984). In
addition to industrial processes, an increase in viscosity due to β-glucan in the human body
is related to vital benefits that reduce sugar absorption in diabetic patients or bring about
lowering of cholesterol. When lower viscosity is required in the product, processors often
prefer to use either a low concentration of β-glucan or low-molecular-weight β-glucan as
ingredients. In these products, this will enhance sensory properties but physiological benefits
that are associated with ingestion of β-glucan will be lowered. Therefore, while developing
nutraceutical foods enriched with higher amounts of β-glucan, a satisfactory balance among
nutraceutical properties, physiological health benefits, and sensory properties should be kept
in mind (Brennan and Cleary, 2005).
Concerning the viscosity of β-glucan solution, factors like pH, temperature, source, and
extraction conditions are important. The β-glucan solution can be kept in unchanged
form over a wide pH range (2–10), but stability decreases with a rise in temperature over

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

367

a specific limit. Normally a slight rise in temperature is required to achieve an increase
in viscosity, but when the temperature rises above 75°C viscosity tends to decline. The
molecular weight of β-glucan is also a deciding factor for the viscosity of β-glucancontaining solutions (Ahmad et al., 2009b; Dongowski et al., 2005; Papageorgiou
et al., 2005). Concentration of β-glucan is highly correlated with higher viscosities in an
aqueous solution. This is equally true for industrial conditions as well as the intestinal tract
of the human body. Variation in sources of extraction of β-glucan affects the molecular mass
of β-glucan and thus the viscosity behavior of a solution to which this β-glucan is added
as an ingredient. As the research carried out on muffins, thus holds true for muffins and
require more research to confirm this phenomenon for other bakery products. The only thing
affected during storage of β-glucan product is its solubility at freezing temperatures (Beer
et al., 1997).
Extraction conditions also affect the final viscosity of the β-glucan. Extraction of oat β-glucan
at very high pH will cause changes in β-glucan that may lower its viscosity property. The
interaction between high pH and medium temperature is highly unfavorable for the viscous
property of β-glucan. This is attributed to the sensitive nature of 1→3 linkages at higher pH
levels or medium temperatures.
The endogenous enzymes are responsible for the changes in viscosity. There are at least
two endogenous glucan hydrolase enzymes that cause degradation of β-glucans that
ultimately modify the viscosity property of β-glucan. Sometimes these enzymes initiate
depolymerization reactions, resulting in low viscosities (Ahmad and Anjum, 2010; Burkus
and Temelli, 2000). Other factors that may affect the viscous nature in solution form are
concentration of β-glucan content, salt concentration, sugars, and their interactions. These
factors were studied by Vaikousi and Biliaderis (2005) with reference to changes in viscosity.
During this study, viscosity was measured at different shear rates using response surface
methodology. The researchers developed a positive linear model for β-glucan content and
sugars. Salt did not significantly affect the viscosity property in solution form at a shear rate
of 125 per second. However, the inclusion of β-glucan in solution form showed a significant
negative quadratic effect for all three responses. Interaction between β-glucan and sucrose
was negative and significant. A similar trend was observed for the interaction of salt and
β-glucan at shear rates of 10 and 50 per second; significant interaction was observed only
between β-glucan concentration and sucrose contents.
In biological studies, several changes in dietary fiber are evident. Dietary fiber may undergo
changes as it travels into the stomach and intestine. During this passage under gut conditions
some of the insoluble dietary fiber and β-glucan may transform into soluble form. This
transformation causes changes in viscosity and water absorption capacity in the gut. These
changes in rheological properties are also important for the purpose of attaining a specific
physiological response by ingestion of dietary fiber and β-glucan (Wood, 2002).

368

Chapter 11

8 Utilization of β-Glucan in Food Products
Physiochemical properties of β-glucans show great potential to use this valuable ingredient
for preparation of various foods (e.g., ice creams, sauces, and salad dressings) (Wood, 1986).
The major use of β-glucan in food relates to its stabilizing and hydrocolloid nature that
makes it an alternative to guar gum, xanthan gum, locust bean gum, and gum arabic. In this
form its best application could be for frozen ready-to-eat foods (Dawkins and Nnanna, 1995;
Wood, 1986). Lyly et al. (2004) incorporated β-glucan into frozen ready-to-eat foods. As
a thickening agent for beverages, sauces, ice creams, and salad dressings, β-glucan has
applicable properties (Temelli et al., 2004; Wood, 1986). There is evidence that β-glucan
from barley and mushroom sources has great potential to enrich snack products that have
exhibited better physical and textural characteristics as compared to a control recipe. Such
β-glucan-containing products may increase the possibility of controlling glycemic responses
to a suitable condition (Brennan et al., 2013; Tosh, 2013). Similar potential of β-glucan was
demonstrated while studying the effect of resistant starch, β-glucan, and simple starch on
sausages using a response surface methodology technique. All of these treatments influenced
most of the physical and sensory parameters. β-Glucan in combination with resistant starch
produced a softer texture in sausages that is required for great consumer acceptance. The
addition of these dietary fiber sources also positively influenced the color and other sensory
parameters. Optimum formulation with the addition of 1.328% is possible in addition to
incorporating resistant starch and simple starch (Amini Sarteshnizi et al., 2015).
Owing to greater health benefits and the potential of using it as a vital ingredient in the food
industry, the US FDA supported the usage of β-glucan as a functional ingredient in food
items and endorsed a dose of 3 grams daily to provide health benefits (FDA, 1997). There
is a strong relationship between consumption of β-glucan and other dietary fibers and the
lowering of heart-related problems and incidence of diabetes. Their usage in staple foods
offers a great advantage to achieve these health parameters. Administration of β-glucan in
the body stimulates increased macrophage activity and enhances phagocytosis and secretory
activities of macrophages. A cascade of reactions started by macrophage regulatory factors
can be anticipated to occur and to eventuate in conversion of the glucan-treated host to an
arsenal of defense (Fig. 11.4). Bread is a common staple food used in breakfasts in most
countries. The use of β-glucan and other dietary fibers in bread will be an applicable strategy
to activate phagocytosis activity and related reactions that may improve immune responses
within the body. Other beneficial applications of β-glucan involve reduction of coronary
heart problems and diabetes, and control of LDL cholesterol. This usage in food products will
also impart better viscoelastic properties in bread dough and other bakery products (Ahmad
et al., 2008; Byun et al., 2016; Jalil et al., 2015).
Another industrial advantage of using β-glucan is its nature to act as a carbohydrate-based
fat replacer, thus lowering the amount of fat in the product in order to develop products

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

369

Figure 11.4: β-Glucan Activation of Macrophages.

for weight watchers and diabetic patients. The β-glucan from spent brewer’s yeast may
be extracted and can be used to develop a low-fat mayonnaise product. The replacement
of fat in this case is dependent on the texture-modifying properties of β-glucan. Several
levels of β-glucan have a tendency to exhibit acceptable quality parameters when added
to a mayonnaise product. However, selective organoleptic properties related to color and
appearance may have undesirable effects on the quality of mayonnaise (da Silva Araújo
et al., 2014). Apart from spent yeast β-glucan, there is evidence that cereal β-glucan also
imparts similar fat replacer properties. This was explored for the development of a low-fat
cheese product. Cereal β-glucan resulted in improved texture in the final product (Lazaridou
et al., 2014). The effectiveness of β-glucan as a fat replacer in meat products was explored by
Álvarez and Barbut (2013), who found the suitability of β-glucan in color, emulsion stability,
microstructure, and other textural characteristics in cooked meat batters. Without the use of
β-glucan or other dietary fiber source, reduction in fat content adversely affects the cooking
loss and causes a reduction in emulsion stability. This reduction in fat content also adversely
influences the lightness properties, hard texture, and fracturing properties of cooked meat
emulsions. This therefore necessitates that some dietary fiber ingredients be added in the
system to lessen the effect of fat reduction. For that purpose, use of β-glucan, inulin, or their
mixtures can provide a solution as fat replacer in this system. Published micrographs in this
case have highly supported the idea of the addition of β-glucan alone or in mixtures of inulin
plus β-glucan. This will have a positive effect on most textural properties and also reduce the
losses during cooking. Another β-glucan preparation was made using oat as raw material.
Later on, this product was commercialized with the name of Nutrim. This product has several

370

Chapter 11

uses, including usage as fat replacer since its properties make it possible to partially replace
saturated fats. In another research attempt, the extracted β-glucan preparation with the name
of Nutrim-5 was developed from oat flour and bran using thermo-shearing processing. This
again has excellent fat replacer and hydrocolloid properties. Its usage in rice flour noodles
gives excellent results when incorporated at a level of 10%. The binding and rheological
properties of this preparation are ideal in these products (Inglett et al., 2003, 2005). The
hydrocolloid nature of this product is also important for use in Thai foods as a fat replacer.
This addition enables the researchers to reduce saturated fats from the product. This strategy
may lead the way to incorporation in cakes, cookies, pumpkin pudding, dips, custard, and
sauté. A similar product with the name of Oatrim is again extracted from oat as raw material
and is rich in β-glucan contents in addition to amylodextrins. This product is also meant for
replacing fats with the soluble fiber nature of β-glucan. Several potential food products in
which this ingredient may be used are muffins, meats, cakes, salad dressings, frozen desserts,
sauces, gravies, soups, mayonnaise, margarine, breakfast cereals, and candy products (Inglett
and Warner, 1992; Inglett et al., 2004).
Large numbers of dairy products are consumed in every part on the globe. The addition of
β-glucan in these products will ensure provision of nutraceutically based products to the
population. It is a unique concept to develop new products with bioactive compounds. To
implement this idea, a study was planned to investigate the interaction and mechanism for
acid-set milk products containing caseinates. The details about microstructure and mechanical
behavior were used to explain the results on texture of fermented dairy products. In the case
of β-glucan-fortified cheese, desirable product development is possible with the use of oat
β-glucan at levels of 0.7% and 1.4% (w/w). This product was compared with two controls;
one was with full fat and the other was without β-glucan. Samples containing β-glucan
in low-fat cheese milk showed a significant increase in organic acids during the cheese
ripening stage (Kontogiorgos et al., 2006; Lazaridou et al., 2014; Volikakis et al., 2004).
Food applications are not the only area in which β-glucan from different sources can be used.
There are some instances where β-glucan was used for pharmaceutical products, showing
its effectiveness as biological material. This is based on its natural applications against
antiinflammatory activity and antitumor activity (Ishibashi et al., 2004; Li et al., 2004).

8.1 β-Glucan and Bakery Products
For developing bakery products having nutraceutical value, the importance of dietary fiber
and β-glucan is evident from the literature. In these preparations they are used as stabilizers,
thickening agents, and foaming agents and to promote water retention. With these properties,
products may be marketed as nutraceutical products. Normal breads prepared with ordinary
wheat flour contain less than 2.5% of dietary fiber, which is insufficient to provide the
daily requirement of dietary fiber if this product is used as a staple food. If citizens of
Western nations who are deficient in dietary fiber consumption use β-glucan-containing

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

371

flour for bread preparation in their daily diets, it will improve their dietary fiber status on a
daily basis (Ahmad et al., 2009a; Dziezak, 1987). In a research study, Brennan and Cleary
(2007) explored the way we can increase the nutritional status of bread using dietary fiber.
They suggested the use of barley β-glucan to improve the dietary fiber content of bread.
The addition of β-glucan in these breads at a level of 2.5%–5% also reduced the release of
reducing sugars while conducting an in vitro experiment. This happened in the bread with less
conversion of starch into reducing sugars and resulted higher value of starch in the product.
Overall, these mechanisms resulted in reduction of hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia, with
reference to the control of diabetes (Ahmad et al., 2009a,b; Hajifaraji et al., 2012). A strong
correlation exists between glycemic index and content of β-glucan in bread. Incorporation of
oat flour into wheat flour that can increase β-glucan content by a value of 2.5% β-glucan is
highly beneficial, as it ensures the daily consumption of β-glucan recommended by the FDA,
provided that the person consumes at least two slices of this bread (Flander et al., 2007).
Addition of β-glucan into bread sometimes causes a reduction in loaf volume with a firm
crumb structure. This reduction in loaf volume is attributed to dilution of gluten content that
reduces its property to hold gases during the fermentation process. Binding of more water
in the dough also causes less availability of water to gluten. This underdeveloped gluten
network is not capable of retaining gases in the cells to gain in volume and texture. Trogh
et al. (2004) incorporated cereal β-glucan in wheat flour and raised the soluble dietary fiber
with chemical structure of (1→3)(1→4)-β-d-glucan and arabinoxylan (AX) of dough. To
solve the problem of substandard loaf volume, scientists directed their research toward the
use of β-glucan in unpurified form instead of purified form. For this purpose, they used
the whole barley flour, which is a good source of β-glucan. In this experiment, β-glucan
in refined form was not added to the wheat flour. This resulted in production of bread with
good sensory properties, and such breads have an acceptable volume. During this process,
enzymatic degradation of β-glucan in the raw blend of wheat and barley flour was restricted
by using coarse flour that offered less surface area for enzymatic action (Ahmad et al., 2008;
Cavallero et al., 2002; Flander et al., 2007; Trogh et al., 2004).
A recent study evaluated the potential use of barley flour for the production of sour dough.
The production of sourdough is often characterized by use of microorganisms capable of
running a fermentation process, and physically it seems difficult to produce sourdough
of improved quality, as microorganisms in sourdough can hydrolyze β-glucan during
fermentation (Sullivan et al., 2013). The effect of β-glucan incorporation in rice-based dough
that offered a gluten-free product was evaluated. As expected, the rheological properties with
reference to water holding capacity were influenced significantly. A negative correlation was
evident between loaf-specific volume with dough elastic modulus (G′) and the viscosity (η0).
Loaf volume was positively correlated with the loss tangent. After hydration to a maximum
point, the rheological behavior and bread quality was affected by the levels of incorporated
barley β-glucan. In contrast, the use of oat β-glucan at various levels influenced these
parameters to a lesser extent. These trends elucidate that β-glucan from barley consists of

372

Chapter 11

a low-molecular-weight substance that can generate a gel network if it is added in higher
amounts. On the other hand, oat β-glucan with higher molecular weight shows more viscous
behavior even at low concentration of β-glucan. Quantification of β-glucan in bread indicated
that enzymes like β-glucanase significantly hydrolyze the β-glucan molecule, thus cutting
their molecular weight. This necessitates that enzymatic activity must be controlled during
this process in gluten-free doughs to reap the full benefit of β-glucan as a nutraceutical
component and to achieve certain health benefits (Ahmad et al., 2008; Ronda et al., 2015).

8.2 β-Glucan and Meat Products
Meat and its derivatives are considered functional foods, but still there is a possibility to add
more functional ingredients into them. This idea of supplementation of meat with dietary
fiber, β-glucan, and some other nutraceutical ingredients for the purpose of achieving health
benefits beyond basic nutrients will open up new avenues for the meat industry. Despite
using conventional meat products, meat processors should explore innovative prospects
for the meat industry. This may include controlling the composition of raw and processed
materials via reformulation of a product recipe through inclusion of β-glucan, dietary fiber,
antioxidants, probiotics, and some other nutraceutical ingredients (Siró et al., 2008). When
mushroom extract was added into meat products, it provided protection against bacteria
and oxidation reactions. This was actually attributed to the presence of β-glucan and other
dietary fibers along with several natural antioxidants. This addition of mushroom extract
also resulted in stabilization of meat color in the final products. Storage duration may be
doubled or even tripled by this technique (Aida et al., 2009). Dietary β-glucan also has an
impact on the quality of broiler breast meat following ingestion of β-glucan by chickens. A
quantity of 60 ppm β-glucan in the feed of broiler chickens not only guarantees improvement
in survival rate and feed conversion rate, but it also provides immunity against disease.
Thus, consumption of β-glucan at this level in broilers shows the same effect as the quantity
of antibiotics Zn-bacitracin at the level of 55 ppm. The outcomes of this study showed the
potential of β-glucan (60 ppm) as an alternative to antibiotics in extending the survival rate
of broilers (Moon et al., 2016). In an attempt to investigate the effects of β-glucan and inulin
as dietary fiber sources for low-fat beef burgers, researchers observed more moisture holding
capacity, increase in cooking yield, reduction in lightness, and satisfactory textural parameters
of burger patties. Optimization results indicated that the combination of inulin (3.1 g per
100 g), β-glucan (2.2 g per 100 g), and bread crumbs (2.7 g per 100 g) may provide better
textural characteristics and cooking properties without altering organoleptic characteristics of
the burger (Afshari et al., 2015). The properties of β-glucan as a fat replacer is applicable in
meatball products. The molecular weight of β-glucan in this case is an important determinant
to declare the overall quality of the low-fat meatballs. Intact β-glucan or hydrolyzed β-glucan
from oats may influence the quality of the product to which it is added as a nutraceutical
ingredient. Both the hydrolyzed form and the unhydrolyzed form of β-glucan exhibit shear-

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

373

thinning behavior in these products, and hydrolyzed β-glucan due to low molecular weight
also showed a decrease in the apparent viscosity. Scanning electron microscopy indicated
improvement in smooth surface by the addition of hydrolyzed β-glucan (Liu et al., 2015).
Some other functions of β-glucan and several other forms of dietary fibers in processed meat
include: as binding agent, as filler agent, as extender ingredient, and as fat replacer, as well
as to add a synergistic effect with nutrients, to control pH, to improve emulsion stability, to
improve water holding capacity, and to expand its sensory parameters (Talukder, 2015).

8.3 β-Glucan and Dairy Products
Fermented dairy products have a great potential to develop effective delivery systems
for β-glucans from various sources. Addition of β-glucans into milk or milk products or
into dairy-based derived protein gels during the process of fermentation that produce acids
and oxidative products of monosaccharides results in production of glucono-δ-lactone.
This substance may modify textural, physiochemical, chemical, and sensory properties of
milk products due to phase separation between these polysaccharides and milk proteins,
thus altering the gelation process through retardation of interaction between proteins and
carbohydrates. Higher temperatures during fermentation also favor acidification in these
products, yielding a shorter gelation time. Probiotic strains, if included during the fermentation
process, resulted in an increase in gelation rate (Lazaridou et al., 2014). Exopolysaccharides
from Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens are rich in dietary fiber, including β-glucan, and also
possess similar capacities to apply in dairy products (Ahmed et al., 2013a,b). Another
exopolysaccharide-producing strain is Lactobacillus mucosae DPC 6426, which has a great
potential to be used as an adjunct culture for the manufacturing of low-fat yogurt. These
exopolysaccharides hold space in the pores of the gel network as confirmed by confocal laser
scanning microscopy (London et al., 2015). Addition of glucagel, a commercial product
derived from barley that is rich in β-glucan dietary fiber, influences the phase separation
phenomenon in skimmed milk. In the presence of β-glucan dietary fiber, casein micelle
showed depleted flocculation that is the driving force behind controlling phase separation.
Volume fraction of casein molecules and the concentration of glucagel also control the rate at
which phase separation may occur in dairy-based systems. Low-molecular-weight β-glucan
was effective to limit the range of attraction between protein micelles and to produce a stable
phase in the presence of casein micelles. These phase diagrams will be useful to dairy product
manufacturers striving to improve the nutrient profiles of their products while avoiding product
quality impairment (Repin et al., 2012; Sharafbafi et al., 2014).

8.4 β-Glucan and Pasta Products
In the modern era, consumers are demanding more products having health implications.
These health benefits may be added in commonly consumed foods like pasta products. When

374

Chapter 11

β-glucan from an unusual source, Amaranthus mantegazzianus, was added in wheat flour,
it improved the pasta characteristics and influenced positively the dietary fiber content and
the glycemic index, along with an improvement in carbohydrate and protein digestibility.
Beneficial effects can be achieved if this source is added at the 30% level (Martinez
et al., 2016). The incorporation of barley β-glucan into pasta has documented health benefits
such as lowering of the glycemic index. Beyond its physiological benefits, it also requires
suitable changes in processing methods as well to cause improvement in color, flavor, taste,
and texture (Izydorczyk and Dexter, 2008). Barley β-glucan, when incorporated into wheat
flour, imparts increased strength to dough, causes required changes in viscoelastic properties
of the dough, and makes the dough have high resistance during mixing (Izydorczyk
et al., 2001). Similarly, soluble β-glucan from barley has a capacity to reduce the resistance of
dough against extension. Stickiness properties of starches are also influenced by the presence
of β-glucan in these products. This addition also causes lowering of the viscosity of gel and
elevation in gelatinization temperature (Brennan and Cleary, 2007). Pasta products produced
with addition of β-glucan and enriched with wheat semolina showed a great potential for
substitution at a level of 50%. This may result in a slightly darker color pasta product but
have better quality cooking (Marconi et al., 2000). To produce yellow alkaline and white
salted noodles using conventional processes with addition of barley flour as a source of βglucan results in an increase in water absorption in the pasta dough. This reduces the quantity
of available water in the system and thus suppresses the gluten development and gas holding
capacity that are considered positive traits for pasta production (Gill et al., 2002). The recipe
for white salted noodles contains about 40% hull-less flour of barley, which was sufficient to
satisfy the β-glucan level recommended by the FDA (2004). However, the effect is dependent
on the physicochemical properties of β-glucans (Brennan and Cleary, 2007). Addition of
β-glucan in pasta products produces dough that has high set thermoirreversible properties
and is regarded as a β-glucan-enriched functional product (Laroche and Michaud, 2007).
The β-glucan-enriched functional pastas produced by 50% of standard wheat durum
semolina with barley flour that is enriched in β-glucan showed better quality with regard to
firmness, bulkiness, and stickiness than pasta products produced by durum wheat (Marconi
et al., 2000).

Conclusions
β-Glucan is a nonstarch polysaccharide having documented health benefits and industrial
applications. It can be extracted from various sources, including cereals, bacteria, molds,
and fungi. The chemical nature of extracted β-glucan from these sources differs slightly.
This variation in chemistry defines its industrial uses and health benefits. Apart from
source, the properties of β-glucan also depend on extraction techniques. Although several
extraction techniques have been developed for extraction of β-glucan, there is yet more
need to devise new extraction and purification techniques that can be materialized to

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

375

increase the recovery of β-glucan from various sources. Documented health benefits
make β-glucan a potential candidate for food product development having nutraceutical
status. In the past decade, research was focused on investigating the use of β-glucan in
bakery products, dairy products, meat products, and beverage products. There is still room
to explore more areas for product development with reference to industrially important
properties in these products.

References
Afshari, R., Hosseini, H., Khaksar, R., Mohammadifar, M.A., Amiri, Z., Komeili, R., Khaneghah, A.M., 2015.
Investigation of the effects of inulin and [beta]-glucan on the physical and sensory properties of low-fat beef
burgers containing vegetable oils: optimisation of the formulation using D-optimal mixture design. Food
Technol. Biotechnol. 53 (4), 436.
Ahmad, A., Ahmed, Z., 2011. Tailoring oat for future foods. In: Danielle, L.M. (Ed.), Oats: Cultivation, Uses and
Health Effects. Nova Science Publishers, Hauppauge, NY.
Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., Zahoor, T., Chatha, Z.A., Nawaz, H., 2008. Effect of barley β-glucan on sensory
characteristics of bread. Pak. J. Agric. Sci. 45 (1), 88–94.
Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., Zahoor, T., Nawaz, H., 2009a. Extraction of β-glucan from oat and its interaction with
glucose and lipoprotein profile. Pak. J. Nutr. 8 (9), 1486–1492.
Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., Zahoor, T., Nawaz, H., Din, A., 2009b. Physicochemical and functional properties of
barley β-glucan as affected by different extraction procedures. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 44 (1), 181–187.
Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., 2010. Perspective of β-Glucan: Extraction and Utilization. VDM Publishers,
Saarbrücken, Germany.
Ahmad, A., Anjum, F.M., Zahoor, T., Nawaz, H., Dilshad, S.M.R., 2012a. Beta glucan: a valuable functional
ingredient in foods. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 52 (3), 201–212.
Ahmad, A., Munir, B., Muhammad, A., Shaukat, B., Muhammad, A., Tahira, T., 2012b. Perspective of β-glucan as
functional ingredient for food industry. J. Nutr. Food Sci. 2 (2), 133–139.
Ahmed, Z., Wang, Y., Anjum, N., Ahmad, A., Khan, S.T., 2013a. Characterization of exopolysaccharide produced
by Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens ZW3 isolated from Tibet kefir—Part II. Food Hydrocolloid. 30 (1),
343–350.
Ahmed, Z., Wang, Y., Anjum, N., Ahmad, H., Ahmad, A., Raza, M., 2013b. Characterization of new
exopolysaccharides produced by coculturing of L. kefiranofaciens with yoghurt strains. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 59, 377–383.
Aida, F.M.N.A., Shuhaimi, M., Yazid, M., Maaruf, A.G., 2009. Mushroom as a potential source of prebiotics: a
review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 20 (11–12), 567–575.
Álvarez, D., Barbut, S., 2013. Effect of inulin, β-glucan and their mixtures on emulsion stability, color and textural
parameters of cooked meat batters. Meat Sci. 94 (3), 320–327.
American Diabetes Association, 1999. Nutrition recommendations and principles for people with diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes Care 22, 42–49.
Amini Sarteshnizi, R., Hosseini, H., Bondarianzadeh, D., Colmenero, F.J., Khaksar, R., 2015. Optimization of
prebiotic sausage formulation: effect of using β-glucan and resistant starch by D-optimal mixture design
approach. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 62 (1, Part 2), 704–710.
Anderson, J.W., 1991. Lipid responses of hypercholesterolemic men to oat-bran and wheat-bran intake. Am. J.
Clin. Nutri. 54, 678–683.
Anderson, J.W., 1995. Dietary fiber, complex carbohydrate and coronary artery disease. Can. J. Cardiol. 11, 55–62.
Banik, S.P., Khowala, S., Pal, C., Mukherjee, S., 2015. Proteomic approaches to identify novel therapeutics and
nutraceuticals from filamentous fungi: prospects and challenges. In: Bagchi, D., Swaroop, A., Bagchi, M.
(Eds.), Genomics, Proteomics and Metabolomics in Nutraceuticals and Functional Foods. 2nd ed. Wiley,
Chichester, England, p. 265.

376

Chapter 11

Beer, M.U., Wood, P.J., Weisz, J., 1997. Molecular weight distribution and (1→3) (1→4)-β-glucan content of
consecutive extracts of various oat and barley cultivars. Cereal Chem. 74 (7), 476–480.
Böhm, N., Kulicke, W.M., 1999. Rheological studies of barley (1→3) (1→4)-β-glucan in concentrated solution:
investigation of the viscoelastic flow behaviour in the sol-state. Carbohydr. Polym. 315, 293–301.
Borchani, C., Fonteyn, F., Jamin, G., Paquot, M., Thonart, P., Blecker, C., 2016. Physical, functional and structural
characterization of the cell wall fractions from baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Food Chem. 194,
1149–1155.
Brennan, C.S., Cleary, L.J., 2005. The potential use of cereal (1→3) (1→4)-β-d-glucans as functional food
ingredients. J. Cereal Sci. 42 (4), 1–13.
Brennan, C.S., Cleary, L.J., 2007. Utilisation of glucagel in the β-glucan enrichment of breads: a physicochemical
and nutritional evaluation. Food Res. Int. 40 (2), 291–296.
Brennan, M.A., Derbyshire, E., Tiwari, B.K., Brennan, C.S., 2013. Integration of β-glucan fibre rich fractions from
barley and mushrooms to form healthy extruded snacks. Plant Foods Hum. Nutr. 68 (1), 78–82.
Burkus, Z., Temelli, F., 2000. Stabilization of emulsions and foams using barley beta-glucan. Food Res. Int. 33,
27–33.
Byun, E.B., Park, S.H., Jang, B.S., Sung, N.Y., Byun, E.H., 2016. Gamma-irradiated β-glucan induces
immunomodulation and anticancer activity through MAPK and NF-kB pathways. J. Sci. Food Agric. 96 (2),
695–702.
CAC (Codex Alimentarius Commission), 2006. Report of the 27th Session of the Codex Committee on Nutrition
and Foods for Special Dietary Uses (CCNFSDU), Bonn, Germany, 21–25 November 2005. ALINORM
06/29/26, 2006.
CAC (Codex Alimentarius Commission), 2008. Report of the 30th Session of the Codex Committee on Nutrition
and Foods for Special Dietary Uses, Cape Town, South Africa, 3–7 November 2008. ALINORM 09/32/26.
CAC (Codex Alimentarius Commission), 2009. Report of the 31st Session of the Codex Committee on Nutrition
and Foods for Special Dietary Uses, Dusseldorf, Germany, 2–6 November 2009. ALINORM 10/33/26.
CAC (Codex Alimentarius Commission), 2015. Codex Alimentarius Guidelines on nutrition labelling CAC/GL
2-1985 as last revision in 2015. Joint FAO/WHO, Codex Alimentarius International Food Standards, FAO,
Rome.
Carbonero, E.R., Gracher, A.H.P., Smiderle, F.R., Rosado, F.R., Sassaki, G.L., Gorin, P.A.J., Iacomini, M., 2006.
A β-glucan from the fruit bodies of edible mushrooms Pleurotus eryngii and Pleurotus ostreatoroseus.
Carbohydr. Polym. 66, 252–257.
Carpenter, K., Breslin, W., Davidson, T., Adams, A., McFarlin, B., 2013. Baker’s yeast β-glucan supplementation
increases monocytes and cytokines post-exercise: implications for infection risk? Br. J. Nutr. 109 (03),
478–486.
Cavallero, A., Empilli, S., Brighenti, F., Stanca, A.M., 2002. High (1→3, 1→4)-β-glucan barley fractions in bread
making and their effects on human glycemic response. J. Cereal Sci. 36, 59–66.
Cheung, N.-K.V., Modak, S., Vickers, A., Knuckles, B., 2002. Orally administered β-glucans enhance anti-tumor
effects of monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 51 (10), 557–564.
Codex, 1998. Codex Alimentarius: Food Labelling Complete Texts. FAO/WHO, Rome, Italy.
da Silva Araújo, V.B., de Melo, A.N.F., Costa, A.G., Castro-Gomez, R.H., Madruga, M.S., de Souza, E.L.,
Magnani, M., 2014. Followed extraction of β-glucan and mannoprotein from spent brewer’s yeast
(Saccharomyces uvarum) and application of the obtained mannoprotein as a stabilizer in mayonnaise. Innov.
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 23, 164–170.
Dawkins, N.L., Nnanna, I.A., 1995. Studies on oat gum (1→3, 1→4)-β-d-glucan: composition, molecular weight
estimation and rheological properties. Food Hydrocoll. 9 (1), 1–7.
Demirbas, A., 2005. β-Glucan and mineral nutrient contents of cereals grown in Turkey. Food Chem. 90, 773–777.
Devi, K.S.P., Behera, B., Mishra, D., Maiti, T.K., 2015. Immune augmentation and Dalton’s lymphoma
tumor inhibition by glucans/glycans isolated from the mycelia and fruit body of Pleurotus ostreatus. Int.
Immunopharmacol. 25 (1), 207–217.
DeVries, J.W., 2001. AACC report: the definition of dietary fiber. Cereal Food. World 46 (3), 112–126.

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

377

Dodevska, M.S., Djordjevic, B.I., Sobajic, S.S., Miletic, I.D., Djordjevic, P.B., Dimitrijevic-Sreckovic, V.S., 2013.
Characterisation of dietary fibre components in cereals and legumes used in Serbian diet. Food Chem. 141
(3), 1624–1629.
Dongowski, G., Drzikova, B., Senge, B., Blochwitz, R., Gebhardt, E., Habel, A., 2005. Rheological behaviour of
β-glucan preparations from oat products. Food Chem. 93, 279–291.
Drzikova, B., Dongowski, G., Gebhardt, E., Habel, A., 2005. The composition of dietary fibre-rich extrudates
from oat affects bile acid binding and fermentation in vitro. Food Chem. 90, 181–192.
Dziezak, J.D., 1987. Yeasts and yeast derivatives. Appl. Food Technol. 41, 122–125.
El-Sayed, M.H., Arafat, H.H., Elsehemy, I.A., Basha, M., 2016. Optimization, purification and physicochemical
characterization of curdlan produced by Paenibacillus sp. strain NBR-10. Biosci. Biotechnol. Res. Asia 13 (2).
FDA, 1997. Food labeling, health claims: oats and coronary heart disease; rules and regulations. Fed. Reg. 62,
3584–3601.
FDA, 2004. Code of federal regulations, health claims: soluble fiber from certain foods and risk of coronary
heart disease (CHD). Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC. Food labeling available
from http://a257.g.akamaitech.net/7/257/2422/12feb20041500/docket.access.gpo.gov/cfr_2004/aprqtr/
pdf/21cfr101.81.pdf.
Fincher, G.B., Stone, B.A., 1986. Cell walls and their components in cereal grain technology. In: Pomeranz, Y.
(Ed.), Advances in Cereal Science and Technology. American Association of Cereal Chemists, St. Paul, MN,
pp. 207–295.
Flander, L., Salmenkallio-Marttila, M., Suortti, T., Autio, K., 2007. Optimization of ingredients and baking process
for improved wholemeal oat bread quality. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 40, 860–870.
Genc, H., Ozdemir, M., Demirbas, A., 2001. Analysis of mixed-linked (1→3), (1→4)-β-d-glucans in cereal grains
from Turkey. Food Chem. 73, 221–224.
Gibeaut, D.M., Pauly, M., Bacic, A., Fincher, G.B., 2005. Changes in cell wall polysaccharides in developing
barley (Hordeum vulgare) coleoptiles. Planta 221 (5), 729–738.
Gill, S., Vasanthan, T., Ooraikul, B., Rossnagal, B., 2002. Wheat bread quality as influenced by the substitution of
waxy and regular barley flours in their native and cooked forms. J. Cereal Sci. 36 (2), 239–251.
Glore, S.R., Van, T.D., Knehans, A.W., Guild, M., 1994. Soluble fiber and serum lipids: a literature review. J. Am.
Diet. Assoc. 94, 425–436.
Hajifaraji, M., Najjar Safari, S., Rezvani, V., Rashidkhani, B., Maddah, M., 2012. Comparison study between
the effect of oat and barley breads on serum glucose and lipid profiles in dyslipidemic and type 2 diabetic
subjects: a short-term trial. Mediterr. J. Nutr. Metab. 5 (3), 247–252.
Ho, H.V.T., Sievenpiper, J.L., Zurbau, A.L., Mejia, S.B., Jovanovski, E., Yeung, F.A., Jenkins, A.L., Vuksan,
V., 2016. The effect of oat beta-glucan on clinical lipid markers for cardiovascular disease risk reduction: a
systematic review & meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. FASEB J. 30 (1 Suppl.), 285–289.
Hollmann, J., Lindhauer, M.G., 2005. Pilot-scale isolation of glucuronoarabinoxylans from wheat bran.
Carbohydr. Polym. 59, 225–230.
Inglett, G.E., Warner, K., 1992. Amylodextrin containing β-glucan from oats as a fat substitute in some cookies
and candies. Cereal Food. World 37, 589.
Inglett, G.E., Carriere, C.G., Maneepun, S., Tungtrakul, P., 2004. A soluble fiber gel produced from rice bran and
barley flour as a fat replacer in Asian foods. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 39, 1–10.
Inglett, G.E., Carriere, C.J., Maneepun, S., 2003. Health related fat replacers prepared from grains for improving
functional and nutritive values of Asian foods. In: Shi, J., Ho, C.-T., Shahidi, F. (Eds.), Asian Functional
Foods. Marcel Dekker, New York.
Inglett, G.E., Peterson, S.C., Carriere, C.J., Maneepun, S., 2005. Rheological, textural, and sensory properties of
Asian noodles containing an oat cereal hydrocolloid. Food Chem. 90, 1–8.
Ishibashi, K.I., Miura, N.N., Adachi, Y., Tamura, H., Tanaka, S., Ohno, N., 2004. The solubilization and biological
activities of Aspergillus β-(1→3)-d-glucan. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 42, 155–166.
Izydorczyk, M., Dexter, J., 2008. Barley β-glucans and arabinoxylans: molecular structure, physicochemical
properties, and uses in food products—a review. Food Res. Int. 41 (9), 850–868.

378

Chapter 11

Izydorczyk, M., Hussain, A., MacGregor, A., 2001. Effect of barley and barley components on rheological
properties of wheat dough. J. Cereal Sci. 34 (3), 251–260.
Jalil, A., Combet, E., Edwards, C.A., Garcia, A.L., 2015. Antioxidant properties of breads prepared with β-glucan
and black tea. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 74 (OCE1), E31–E32.
Jenkins, A.L., Jenkins, D.J., Zdravkovic, U., Wursch, P., Vuksan, V., 2002. Depression of the glycemic index by
high levels of β-glucan fiber in two functional foods tested in type 2 diabetes. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 56, 622–628.
Johansson, L., Virkki, L., Nttila, H., Esselstro, H., Tuomainen, P., Sontag-Strohm, T., 2005. Hydrolysis of βglucan. Food Chem. 97, 71–79.
Kanauchi, M., Bamforth, C.W., 2001. Release of β-glucan from cell walls of starchy endosperm of barley. Cereal
Chem. 78 (2), 121–124.
Kawka, A., Gorecka, D., Gasiorowski, H., 1999. The effects of commercial barley flakes on dough characteristic
and bread composition. Electron. J. Pol. Agric. Univ. 2 (2), 17–23.
Klis, F., Mol, P., Hellingwerf, K., Brul, S., 2002. Dynamic of cell wall structure in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 26, 239–256.
Knuckles, B.E., Hudson, C.A., Chiu, M.M., Sayre, R.N., 1997. Effect of β-glucan barley fractions in high-fibre
bread and pasta. Cereal Food. World 42 (2), 94–100.
Kontogiorgos, V., Biliaderis, C.G., Kiosseoglou, V., Doxastakis, G., 2004. Stability and rheology of egg-yolk-stabilized
concentrated emulsions containing cereal β-glucans of varying molecular size. Food Hydrocoll. 18 (6), 987–998.
Kontogiorgos, V., Ritzoulis, C., Biliaderis, C.G., Kasapis, S., 2006. Effect of barley β-glucan concentration on the
microstructural and mechanical behaviour of acid-set sodium caseinate gels. Food Hydrocoll. 20, 749–756.
Lambo, A.M., Oste, R., Nyman, M.E.G., 2005. Dietary fibre in fermented oat and barley β-glucan rich
concentrates. Food Chem. 89, 283–293.
Laroche, C., Michaud, P., 2007. New developments and prospective applications for β (1,3) glucans. Recent Pat.
Biotechnol. 1 (1), 59–73.
Lazaridou, A., Biliaderis, C.G., Izydorczyk, M.S., 2003. Molecular size effects on rheological properties of oat
β-glucans in solution and gels. Food Hydrocoll. 17, 693–712.
Lazaridou, A., Serafeimidou, A., Biliaderis, C.G., Moschakis, T., Tzanetakis, N., 2014. Structure development and
acidification kinetics in fermented milk containing oat β-glucan, a yogurt culture and a probiotic strain. Food
Hydrocoll. 39, 204–214.
Li, C., Ha, T., Kelley, J., Gao, X., Qiu, Y., Kao, R.L., 2004. Modulating Toll-like receptor mediated signaling by
(1→3)-β-d-glucan rapidly induces cardioprotection. Cardiovasc. Res. 61, 538–547.
Liu, R., Wang, N., Li, Q., Zhang, M., 2015. Comparative studies on physicochemical properties of raw and
hydrolyzed oat β-glucan and their application in low-fat meatballs. Food Hydrocoll. 51, 424–431.
London, L.E.E., Chaurin, V., Auty, M.A.E., Fenelon, M.A., Fitzgerald, G.F., Ross, R.P., Stanton, C., 2015. Use of
Lactobacillus mucosae DPC 6426 an exopolysaccharide-producing strain positively influences the technofunctional properties of yoghurt. Int. Dairy J. 40, 33–38.
Lyly, M., Salmenkallio-Marttila, M., Suortti, T., Autio, K., Poutanen, K., Lahteenmaki, L., 2003. Influence of oat
β-glucan preparations on the perception of mouth feel and on rheological properties in beverage prototypes.
Cereal Chem. 80, 536–541.
Lyly, M., Salmenkallio-Marttila, T., Suortti, K., Autio, K., Poutanen, Lahteenmaki, K., 2004. The sensory
characteristics and rheological properties of soups containing oat and barley β-glucan before and after
freezing. Lebensm. Wiss. Technol. 37, 749–761.
Marconi, E., Graziano, M., Cubadda, R., 2000. Composition and utilization of barley pearling by-products for
making functional pastas rich in dietary fiber and β-glucans. Cereal Chem. 77 (2), 133–139.
Martinez, C.S., Ribotta, P.D., León, A.E., Yildiz, F., 2016. Influence of the addition of Amaranthus mantegazzianus
flour on the nutritional and health properties of pasta. Cogent Food Agric. 2 (1), 1–12.
McIntyre, A., Young, G.P., Taranto, T., Gibson, P.R., Ward, P.B., 1991. Different fibers have different regional
effects on luminal contents of rat colon. Gastroenterology 101 (5), 1274–1281.
Moon, S.H., Lee, I., Feng, X., Lee, H.Y., Kim, J., Ahn, D.U., 2016. Effect of dietary beta-glucan on the
performance of broilers and the quality of broiler breast meat. Asian-Australas. J. Anim. Sci. 29 (3), 384–389.
Morgan, K.R., Ofman, D.J., 1998. Glucagel, a gelling β-glucan from barley. Cereal Chem. 75, 879–881.

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

379

Nguyen, T.H., Fleet, G.H., Rogers, P.L., 1998. Composition of the cell walls of several yeast species. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 50, 206–212.
Panfili, G., Fratianni, A., Irano, M., 2003. Normal phase high-performance liquid chromatography method for the
determination of tocopherols and tocotrienols in cereals. J. Agr. Food Chem. 51, 3940–3944.
Papageorgiou, M., Lakhdara, N., Lazaridou, A., Biliaderisd, C.G., Izydorczyk, M.S., 2005. Water extractable
(1→3) (1→4)-β-d-glucans from barley and oats: an intervarietal study on their structural features and
rheological behaviour. J. Cereal Sci. 42, 213–224.
Phillips, G.O., Cui, S.W., 2011. An introduction: evolution and finalisation of the regulatory definition of dietary
fibre. Food Hydrocoll. 25 (2), 139–143.
Repin, N., Scanlon, M.G., Gary Fulcher, R., 2012. Phase behaviour of casein micelles and barley beta-glucan
polymer molecules in dietary fibre-enriched dairy systems. J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 377 (1), 7–12.
Ronda, F., Perez-Quirce, S., Lazaridou, A., Biliaderis, C.G., 2015. Effect of barley and oat β-glucan concentrates
on gluten-free rice-based doughs and bread characteristics. Food Hydrocoll. 48, 197–207.
Sanjoaquin, M.A., Appleby, P.N., Spencer, E.A., Key, T.J., 2004. Nutrition and lifestyle in relation to bowel movement
frequency: a cross-sectional study of 20,630 men and women in EPIC-Oxford. Public Health Nutr. 7, 77–83.
Schreiber, M., Wright, F., MacKenzie, K., Hedley, P.E., Schwerdt, J.G., Little, A., Burton, R.A., Fincher, G.B.,
Marshall, D., Waugh, R., 2014. The barley genome sequence assembly reveals three additional members of
the CslF (1, 3;1, 4)-β-glucan synthase gene family. PLoS One 9 (3), e90888.
Schulze, M.B., Liu, S., Rimm, E.B., Manson, J.E., Willett, W.C., Hu, F.B., 2004. Glycemic index, glycemic load,
and dietary fiber intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes in younger and middle-aged women. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 80, 348–356.
Sharafbafi, N., Tosh, S.M., Alexander, M., Corredig, M., 2014. Phase behaviour, rheological properties, and
microstructure of oat β-glucan-milk mixtures. Food Hydrocoll. 41, 274–280.
Siró, I., Kápolna, E., Kápolna, B., Lugasi, A., 2008. Functional food: product development, marketing and
consumer acceptance––a review. Appetite 51 (3), 456–467.
Skendi, A., Biliaderis, C.G., Lazaridou, A., Izydorczyk, M.S., 2003. Structure and rheological properties of water
soluble β-glucans from oat cultivars of Avena sativa and Avena bysantina. J. Cereal Sci. 38, 15–31.
Skouroliakou, M., Ntountaniotis, D., Kastanidou, O., Massara, P., 2016. Evaluation of barley’s beta-glucan food
fortification through investigation of intestinal permeability in healthy adults. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 35 (1), 13–19.
Solís-Pacheco, J., Peter, K., López, Z., González-Reynoso, O., Macías-Rodríguez, M., González-Álvarez, V.,
Lacroix, M., Aguilar-Uscanga, B., 2013. Differences in the amount of β-glucan and mannan in strains
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Meyerozyma guilliermondii isolated from agave must used in tequila
production. Microbiol. Res. Int. 2 (1), 1–8.
Stear, C.A., 1990. Formulation and processing techniques for specialty-bread. Handbook of Breadmaking
Technology. Elsevier Science, London, England, 342.
Sullivan, P., Arendt, E., Gallagher, E., 2013. The increasing use of barley and barley by-products in the production
of healthier baked goods. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 29 (2), 124–134.
Sweeney, T., Collins, C., Reilly, P., Pierce, K., Ryan, M., O’Doherty, J., 2012. Effect of purified β-glucans derived
from Laminaria digitata, Laminaria hyperborea and Saccharomyces cerevisiae on piglet performance,
selected bacterial populations, volatile fatty acids and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the gastrointestinal tract
of pigs. Br. J. Nutr. 108 (07), 1226–1234.
Synytsya, A., Novak, M., 2014. Structural analysis of glucans. Ann. Trans. Med. 2 (2), 17.
Talukder, S., 2015. Effect of dietary fiber on properties and acceptance of meat products: a review. Crit. Rev. Food
Sci. Nutr. 55 (7), 1005–1011.
Temelli, F., Bansema, C.B., Stobbe, K.S., 2004. Development of an orange-flavored barley β-glucan beverage with
added whey protein isolate. J. Food Sci. 69 (7), 237–242.
Tosh, S.M., 2013. Review of human studies investigating the post-prandial blood-glucose lowering ability of oat
and barley food products. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 67 (4), 310–317.
Tosh, S.M., Brummer, Y., Wood, P.J., Wang, Q., Weisz, J., 2004. Evaluation of structure in the formation of gels by
structurally diverse (1→3) (1→4)-β-d-glucans from four cereal and one lichen species. Carbohydr. Polym.
57, 249–259.

380

Chapter 11

Trogh, I., Courtin, C.M., Andersson, A.A.M., Man, A.P., Sorensen, J.F., Delcour, J.A., 2004. The combined use
of hull-less barley flour and xylanase as a strategy for wheat/hull-less barley flour breads with increased
arabinoxylan and (1→3) (1→4)-β-d-glucan levels. J. Cereal Sci. 40, 257–267.
Trowell, H., 1972. Crude fiber, dietary fiber and atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 16, 138–140.
Tungland, B.C., Meyer, D., 2002. Nondigestible oligo- and polysaccharides (dietary fiber): their physiology and
role in human health and food. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. F. 1 (3), 90–109, 73.92.
Vaikousi, H., Biliaderis, C.G., 2005. Processing and formulation effects on rheological behavior of barley β-glucan
aqueous dispersions. Food Chem. 91, 505–516.
Vaikousi, H., Biliaderis, C.G., Izydorzcyk, M.S., 2004. Solution flow behavior and gelling properties of watersoluble barley β-glucans varying in molecular size. J. Cereal Sci. 39, 119–137.
Vetvicka, V., Novak, M., 2013. Biology and Chemistry of Beta Glucan, Vol. 2, Beta-Glucan, Structure, Chemistry
and Specific Application. Bentham Science Publishers, Oak Park, IL.
Volikakis, P., Biliaderis, C.G., Vamvakas, C., Zerfiridis, G.K., 2004. Effects of a commercial oat β-glucan
concentrate on the chemical, physico-chemical and sensory attributes of a low-fat white-brined cheese
product. Food Res. Int. 37, 83–94.
Wang, L.J., Newman, R.K., Newman, C.W., Hofer, P.J., 1992. Barley β-glucans alter intestinal viscosity and
reduce plasma cholesterol concentration in chicks. J. Nutr. 122, 2292–2297.
Wang, T., Deng, L., Li, S., Tan, T., 2007. Structural characterization of a water-insoluble (1→3)-α-d-glucan
isolated from the Penicillium chrysogenum. Carbohydr. Polym. 67, 133–137.
WHO, 2001. Safety assessment of foods derived from genetically modified microorganisms: report of a joint
FAO/WHO expert consultation on foods derived from biotechnology, 24–28 September 2001. World Health
Organization/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland. Available from:
<http://www.who.int/fsf/Documents/GMMConsult_Final_pdf>.
WHO, 2003. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a joint WHO/FAO expert
consultation. WHO Technical Report Series 916.
Wilson, S.M., Ho, Y.Y., Lampugnani, E.R., Van de Meene, A.M., Bain, M.P., Bacic, A., Doblin, M.S., 2015.
Determining the subcellular location of synthesis and assembly of the cell wall polysaccharide (1, 3; 1, 4)-βd-glucan in grasses. Plant Cell 27 (3), 754–771.
Wood, P., 1984. Physicochemical properties and technological and nutritional significance of cereal β-glucans.
In: Rasper, V.F. (Ed.), Cereal Polysaccharides in Technology and Nutrition. American Association of Cereal
Chemists, St. Paul, MN, pp. 52–57.
Wood, P.J., 1986. Oat β-glucan: structure, location and properties. In: Webster, F.H. (Ed.), Oats: Chemistry and
Technology. American Association of Cereal Chemists, St. Paul, MN, pp. 121–152.
Wood, P.J., 2002. Relationships between solution properties of cereal β-glucans and physiological effects: a
review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 13, 313–320.
Wood, P.J., Weisz, J., Blackwell, B.A., 1994. Structural studies of (1→3) (1→4)-β-d-glucans by 13 C-nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and by rapid analysis of cellulose-like regions using high-performance
anion-exchange chromatography of oligosaccharides released by lichenase. Cereal Chem. 71 (3), 301–307.
Wu, D., Li, A., Ma, F., Yang, J., Xie, Y., 2016. Genetic control and regulatory mechanisms of succinoglycan and
curdlan biosynthesis in genus Agrobacterium. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100 (14), 6183–6192.
Yalcın, E., Celik, S., Akar, T., Sayim, I., Koksel, H., 2007. Effects of genotype and environment on β-glucan and
dietary fiber contents of hull-less barleys grown in Turkey. Food Chem. 101, 171–176.
Yan, W.W., Yao, H.Y.Y., Nie, S.P., Li, Y.J., 2016. Mineral analysis of hulless barley grown in different areas and its
β-glucan concentrates. Cogent Food Agr. 2, 1186139.
Yang, M., Zhu, Y., Li, Y., Bao, J., Fan, X., Qu, Y., Wang, Y., Hu, Z., Li, Q., 2016. Production and optimization of
curdlan produced by Pseudomonas sp. QL212. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 89, 25–34.
Yokoyama, W.H., Hudson, C.A., Knucles, B.E., Chiu, M.C.M., Sayre, R.N., Turnlund, J.R., Schneeman, B.O.,
1997. Effect of barley β-glucan in durum wheat pasta on human glycemic response. Cereal Chem. 74,
293–296.

β-Glucan as a Food Ingredient

381

Zhang, G., Junmei, W., Jinxin, C., 2002. Analysis of β-glucan content in barley cultivars from different locations
of China. Food Chem. 79 (2), 251–254.
Zhang, M., Cheung, P.C.K., Zhang, L., Chiu, C., Ooi, V.E.C., 2004. Carboxymethylated β-glucans from
mushroom sclerotium of Pleurotus tuber-regium as novel water-soluble anti-tumor agent. Carbohydr. Polym.
57, 319–325.
Zhang, Y., Xia, L., Pang, W., Wang, T., Chen, P., Zhu, B., Zhang, J., 2013. A novel soluble β-1, 3-d-glucan salecan
reduces adiposity and improves glucose tolerance in high-fat diet-fed mice. Br. J. Nutr. 109 (02), 254–262.

