Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 43 (1977) 225-232

225

U l t r a s t r u c t u r e o f Hanseniaspora a s c o s p o r e s

N. J. W. KREGER-VAN RIJ

Laboratory of Medical Microbiology and Laboratory of
Electron Microscopy, Department of Biology, State University,
Groningen, The Netherlands

KREGER-VAN RIJ, N. J. W. 1977. Ultrastructure of Hanseniaspora ascospores.
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 43:225 232.
A comparative study of the ultrastructure in sections of the ascospores of
six Hanseniaspora species showed three types of spores: (1) hat-shaped in
H. valbyensis and H. guilliermondii, (2) spherical with an equatorial or subequatorial ledge, smooth or rough in H. oecidentalis and H. uvarum, (3)
spherical with warts in H. osm.ophila and H. vineae. Development and germination of the spores of Hanseniaspora guilliermondii is described in more detail.
INTRODUCTION
The genus Hanseniaspora includes species with three types of ascospores:
H. valbyensis and H. guilliermondii have hat-shaped spores; H. uvarum and
H. occidentalis have spherical or subglobose spores with an equatorial or
subequatorial ledge, in H. uvarum the wall is slightly warty and in H. occidentalis
it is smooth; H. osmophila and H. vineae have spherical spores with distinct
warts. Kreger-van Rij and Ahearn (1968) have described the ultrastructure of
the spores ofH. uvarum and compared it with that ofH. valbyensis and H. guilliermondii.
The present study primarily concerns development and germination of the
ascospores of H. guilliermondii. In addition, development of the spores of
H. valbyensis, H. uvarum, H. occidentalis, H. osmophila and H. vineae was
examined.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
A strain of Hanseniaspora guilliermondii Pijper was isolated from a fresh fig
bought in Jerusalem, by incubating a piece of it in malt extract for 2 days at

226

N. J. W. KREGER-VAN RIJ

37 C, plating out on malt agar and incubating again at 37 C. A piece of the same
fig incubated in malt extract at 25 C and subcultured on malt agar at 25 C
produced a pure culture of H. uvarum (Niehaus) Shehata, M r a k et Phaff. All
other strains were received from the Yeast Division of the Centraalbureau voor
Schimmelcultures at Delft: H. valbyensis K16cker, CBS 6681; H. occidentalis
Smith, CBS 2592; H. osmophila (Niehaus) Phaff, Miller et Shifrine, CBS 313,
the original strain described by Niehaus (1932); H. vineae van der Walt et
Tscheuschner, CBS 2171, considered to be synonymous with H. osmophila by
Miller and Phaff (1958).
Sporulating cultures were obtained as follows:
H. guilliermondii: on malt agar for 1- 3 days at r o o m temperature or at 25 C;
H. valbyensis: on 5% Difco malt agar for 2 days at r o o m temperature. When
the culture was suspended in water, small clumps of cells could be isolated
which contained m a n y spores; H. uvarum: on 5~o Difco malt agar for 2 days
at 25 C; H. occidentalis: on 10~ malt agar for 2 days at 25 C; H. osmophUa:
on 3~o malt agar for 4 days at r o o m temperature; H. vineae: on G o r o d k o w a
agar for 2 days at r o o m temperature.
Germinating spores of H. guilliermondii were obtained by inoculating a
sporulating culture on malt agar and incubating for 3 h at 25 C, or by shaking
the sporulating culture in malt extract for 2 h at 37 C.
Malt extract 15 ~ Balling was self-prepared from malt; malt agar was prepared
with malt extract of 10 ~
3 ~o and 10 ~o malt agar with respectively 3
and 10~o of this liquid.
For electron microscopy, the material was fixed with 1.5 ~o K M n O 4 for 20
min at r o o m temperature, dehydrated through an ethanol series, and embedded
in Spurr's resin (1969). During dehydration, the fixed cells were stained with
uranyl acetate.
RESULTS
The following stages of ascospore development of Hanseniaspora guilliermondii were observed in sections. A number of cells about to turn into asci had
a lobed, probably meiotic nucleus, often with a membranous structure attached
to it. A prospore wall consisting of two unit membranes enveloped each of the
four nuclei formed after meiosis and other organelles (Fig. 1). The first develThe marker represents 0.5 la.
Figs. 1-8. Sections through ascospores of Hanseniasporaguilliermondii.
Fig. 1. Four very young spores, each delimited by a prospore wall consisting of two unit
membranes.
Fig. 2. Young ascospore with ledge (L).
Fig. 3. The wall of the young spore is thickened on the inside of the ledge.
Fig. 4. The rest of the spore wall develops.
Fig. 5. Ascus with bud (B). The wall of the ascospores has a light inner layer, a greyish part
consisting of the thickening near the ledge and the ledge itself, and a thin dark outer layer.

ULTRASTRUCTUREOF HANSENIASPORAASCOSPORES

227

228

N. J. W. KREGER-VANRIJ

opment of the prospore wall was a small ledge at the base of the hemispherical
spore (Fig. 2). The next stage was a thickening of the wall at the site of the ledge
(Fig. 3). The thickened part was electron-light and the small protruding ledge
somewhat darker. After this, the rest of the prospore wall filled out with light
material (Fig. 4). Compared with this, the first-formed thickening was greyish
and clearly distinguishable from the light part (Fig. 5). In mature spores, still
in the ascus or liberated from it, greyish material was visible around the
protoplast within the light layer (Fig. 6). It formed a more or less distinct ring,
lighter inside and darker at the edge. It is not known whether this layer is the
partly changed light inner layer or a new layer.
During germination of the spores, the thin dark outer layer, which was the
original outer membrane of the prospore wall, broke up and the greyish ring
around the protoplast became the wall of the vegetative cell which emerged
from the rest of the spore wall and formed buds (Figs. 7, 8). The rest of the
spore wall consisted of the light part outside the grey layer, the thickened part
near the ledge and the ledge itself.
Of the other Hanseniaspora species studied, H. valbyensis had ascospores of
similar development and shape as H. guilliermondii (Fig. 9). The spores of
H. valbyensis were also liberated from the ascus, but there were usually only
two of them per ascus. Hanseniaspora uvarum, H. occidentalis, H. osmophila
and H. vineae had one, seldom two spores in each ascus which did not come
free. The asci were generally bigger than the vegetative cells and they had
sometimes become spherical.
The wall of the ascospores of H. uvarum and H. occidentalis developed from
a prospore wall on which a distinct ledge was formed early. The outer membrane of the prospore wall was darker than the plasmalemma at that time.
After the formation of the ledge, the wall filled up with light material whilst
the ledge was somewhat darker. At first, the wall was smooth and it remained
so in H. occidentalis (Fig. 10). In H. uvarum small dark warts were formed
(Fig. 11). In both species the ledge might be irregular; in sections of some spores
it was observed on one side only and the width also varied.
In some, presumably mature, spores of H. uvarum and H. occidentalis a thin
greyish layer was visible around the protoplast. However, it is not possible to
say whether this constitutes the wall of the future vegetative cell without germination experiments.
The ascospores of H. osmophila and H. vineae were similar: without a ledge,
but warty. The wall developed from a prospore wall; the outer membrane was
darker than the inner one at an early stage. A light wall was formed between
the membranes (Fig. 12). The outer part of the light layer became darker and
warts arose, first as slight protrusions (Fig. 13), later more pronounced and
irregular (Fig. 14). Some of them contained light spots. Mature spores had,
apart from the warts, a broad dark outer layer and a light inner layer. Preservation of them was bad.

ULTRASTRUCTURE OF HANSENIASPORA ASCOSPORES

229

Fig. 6. Free, mature spore showing a thin ring of greyish material around the protoplast
(arrow),
Fig. 7, Germinating ascospore. The dark outer layer has broken and the greyish inner layer
has become the wall of the vegetative cell.
Fig. 8. Germinated spore with bud (arrow).

230

N. J. W . KREGER-VAN RU

Fig. 9. Ascospore of H. valbyensis. The thickened part of the wall with the ledge is slightly
darker than the rest of the wall. A greyish layer around the protoplast is not yet visible.
Fig. 10. Ascospore of H. occidentalis. The wall is light with a darker, narrow ledge and a thin,
dark, smooth outer layer.
Fig. 11. Ascospore ofH. uvarum. It has a ledge (arrows) and small, irregular dark warts.

231

ULTRASTRUCTURE OF HANSENIASPORAASCOSPORES

Fig. 12. Young spore of H. vineae. The wall is still smooth.
Fig. 13. Part of the wall of an immature spore ofH. vineae. The wail has a broad light inner
layer and a darker layer including the small warts around it.
Fig. 14, Wall of mature spore of H. vineae with large, irregular dark warts containing light
spots.
DISCUSSION
D e v e l o p m e n t (Fig. 15) a n d g e r m i n a t i o n o f the a s c o s p o r e s o f H . guilliermondii
follows a p a t t e r n which was also o b s e r v e d in a n u m b e r of Pichia a n d Hansenula
species with h a t - s h a p e d spores (unpublished), a n d m a y p r o b a b l y serve as a
m o d e l for this t y p e o f spore.

9

d

e

Fig. 15. Diagram of development of the wall of an ascospore of Hanseniasporaguilliermondii.
a. prospore wall: b. a ledge is present; c. thickening of the wall on the inside of the ledge;
d. a light inner layer has been formed, the ledge and the thickening near it are greyish ; e. a
layer of greyish material is present around the protoplast ; it has developed at the inside of the
light layer and it will become the wall of the vegetative cell after germination of the spore.
T h e ledge, if p r e s e n t on Hanseniaspora spores, was i b r m e d early, before
extension o f the p r o s p o r e wall; this was also f o u n d in species o f o t h e r genera
such as Saccharomycopsis capsularis ( K r e g e r - v a n Rij a n d Veenhuis, 1975) a n d
Schwanniomyces alluvius ( K r e g e r - v a n Rij, 1977). W a r t s were f o r m e d t o w a r d s
the end o f the d e v e l o p m e n t o f the spore wall. T u r n i n g o f the inner layer o f the
spore wall into the wall o f the vegetative cell d u r i n g g e r m i n a t i o n , which was
shown for Hanseniaspora guilliermondii, has also been d e s c r i b e d for Pichia
pijperi ( K r e g e r - v a n Rij, 1969).

232

N. J. W. KREGER-VAN RIJ

Although the shape and structure of the ascospores of the Hanseniaspora
species, with the three different types described above, vary considerably,
other taxonomic features show a close resemblance, such as vegetative reproduction by bipolar budding and the physiological properties. The latter are
clearly different from species in other genera with bipolar budding. Another
character similar for all Hanseniaspora species is the method of diploidization
as described by Miller and Phaff (1958) and Phaff (1970). These authors found
that the nucleus divided during germination of the spores and fused directly
afterwards, so that the first bud on the germinating ascospore was diploid.
In contrast with this proposed diploidization was the occurrence of buds on
part of the asci now observed in all Hanseniaspora species (Fig. 5). The buds
had an open connection with the mother cell and remnants of a separating wall
were never found. Study of the nuclear behaviour may elucidate this phenomenon.
This investigation was supported by the Netherlands Organization for the
Advancement of Pure Research (Z.W.O.). I thank Mr. J. Zagers and Mr.
A. V. H. A. F. Valk for technical assistance and preparation of the photographs
and Mr. E. Leeuwinga for drawing Fig. 15.

Received 10 May 1977
REFERENCES
KREGER-VANRIJ, N. J. W. 1969. Taxonomy and systematics of yeasts, p. 5 78. In A. H. Rose

and J. S. Harrison, (eds.), The Yeasts, Vol. 1, Biology of yeasts.--Academic Press,
London.
KREGER-VANRtJ, N. J. W. 1977. Electron microscopy of sporulation in Schwanniomyces
alluvius.--Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 43: 55-64.
KREGER-VANRIJ, N. J. W. and AHEARN,D. G. 1968. Shape and structure of the ascospores
of Hanseniaspora uvarum.--Mycologia 60: 604-612.
KREGER-VANRIJ, N. J. W. and VEENHUIS,M. 1975. Conjugation in the yeast Saccharomycops& capsularis Schi6nning.--Arch. Microbiol. 104: 263-269.
MILLER, M. W. and PHAFF, H. J. 1958. A comparative study of the apiculate yeasts.-Mycopathologia 10:113-141.
NIEHAUS,C. J. G. 1932. Untersuchungen fiber Apiculatushefen.--Zentr. Bakteriol. Parasitenk. Abt. II 87: 97-150.
PnAFF, H. J. 1970. The genus Hanseniaspora Zikes, p. 209-225. In J. Lodder, (ed.), The
Yeasts.--North-Holland Publ. Co., Amsterdam.
SPURR,A. R. 1969. A low-viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron microscopy.
--J. Ultrastruct. Res. 26:31-43.

