CHAPTE R 9

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances
in Defects Remediation
Fernanda Cosme, Alice Vilela, Luís Filipe-Ribeiro, António Inês,
Fernando M. Nunes
CQ-VR—Chemistry Research Centre, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal

1 Introduction
Since microbiological activity can develop quickly and without warning in wine, early
identification of possible spoilage problems is critical to implementing corrective remedies.
However, identifying the contributing microorganisms and the appropriate correction is
not always simple, because a given microorganism can cause multiple spoilage problems,
and a specific wine fault can be caused by different microorganisms. The contaminations
are often undetected, until the wine problem becomes noticeable by sensory evaluation.
Spoilage microorganisms besides affecting the healthiness of wine can make it unsafe for
human consumption, by producing biogenic amines (BA) and precursors of ethyl carbamate
(Capozzi et al., 2012). A diversity of fungi can infect grapes prior to harvest, the principal
ones being species of Botrytis, Uncinula, Alternaria, Plasmopara, Aspergillus, Penicillium,
Rhizopus, Oidium, and Cladosporium (Fleet, 2001). Fungal growth on grapes can produce
various metabolites and conditions that may disturb the ecology and growth of yeasts
during alcoholic fermentation. There are reports that Botrytis cinerea, Aspergillus spp., and
Penicillium spp. produce metabolites that retard the growth of yeasts during fermentation
(Doneche, 1993).
In wines, the main spoilage microorganisms are yeasts of the genera Dekkera/
Brettanomyces, Candida, Hansenula, Hanseniaspora/Kloeckera, Pichia, Saccharomycodes,
and Zygosaccharomyces, among others (Fig. 9.1); the lactic acid bacteria (LAB)
Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Pediococcus; and the acetic acid bacterial genera
Acetobacter and Gluconobacter (Du Toit and Pretorius, 2000). The faults caused include
excessive bitterness and off-flavors, such as ester taint, vinegar, butter, geranium character,
and phenolic (horsy) character (Bartowsky, 2009) (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). They also cause
sensory visual problems, such as film formation, turbidity, viscosity, and sediment
(Fig. 9.4). The formation of volatile phenols (4-ethylguaiacol and 4-ethylphenol) (Chatonnet
et al., 1997) and mousy off-odor by acetamide production of tetrahydropyridines (Costello
Microbial Contamination and Food Degradation
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811515-2.00009-3

271

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

272

Chapter 9

Figure 9.1: Yeasts-Related Faults in Wine and Examples of Causal Microorganism.
Adapted from Considine, J.A., Frankish, E., 2014. A Complete Guide to Quality in Small-Scale Winemaking, first
ed. Academic Press, Waltham, USA.

Figure 9.2: Summary of Bacterial and Yeasts Pathways Leading to Spoilage Aroma and Flavor
Compounds of Wine.
Adapted from Bartowsky, E.J., 2009. Bacterial spoilage of wine and approaches to minimize it. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 48 (2), 149–156.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

273

Figure 9.3: Pathway to the Formation of 4-Ethylphenol and 4-Ethylguaiacol in Wine.
A carboxylase decarboxylates the hydroxycinnamic acids into the corresponding vinyl derivative
(4-vinylphenol from p-coumaric acid or 4-vinylguaiacol from ferulic acid). In the second reaction, a
reductase converts the vinyl group into the corresponding ethyl compound.

Figure 9.4: Microorganisms sensory visual problems, such as sediment (A1 and A2); film formation
(B); and turbidity and viscosity (C).

274

Chapter 9

and Henschke, 2002) during malolactic fermentation (MLF) can also occur. LAB can
also be responsible for the production of other compounds, which will impart negative
effects on wine quality, such as the formation of ethyl carbamate by the degradation
of arginine (Liu, 2002) and BA, such as histamine, tyramine, and putrescine, by the
degradation of precursor amino acids (Arena and Manca de Nadra, 2001; LonvaudFunel, 2001), compounds that may affect the consumer’s health. Although less frequent,
in our time, bitterness by acrolein formation from glycerol degradation (Claisse and
Lonvaud-Funel, 2001), butter aroma due to excessive production of diacetyl (Martineau
and Henick-Kling, 1995), flocculent growth (Amerine and Kunker, 1968), mannitol
taint (Sponholz, 1993), ropiness (Walling et al., 2001), tartaric acid degradation
(Sponholz, 1993), and the geranium off-odor (Crowell and Guymon, 1975) may occur.
Besides bacteria and yeasts, filamentous fungi, such as Aspergillus, may likewise be
responsible for depreciating the wine quality by the production of mycotoxins, such as
aflatoxins (AFs), ochratoxins, and fumonisins, which are also detrimental for human health
(Zain, 2011). Aspergillus black rot is among one of the many bunch rots occurring on
grapes. The disease appears on the berries as a black rot due to prolific fungal sporulation
after it has attacked and consumed the berries, which look completely empty and dry. This
fungus can be isolated using the Dichloran Rose Bengal Agar medium, a selective isolation
and enumeration of fungi-yeasts and molds, of significance in food spoilage medium
(Fig. 9.5) (Somma et al., 2012).
The selection of yeast and bacteria strains for performing alcoholic and MLFs, gathering the
best enological characteristics and eliminating the bad ones may be the first step for achieving
wines with the best quality. Also, ability of wines deacetification, detoxifying mycotoxins,
and BA must be additional criteria in yeast and bacteria selection for vinification.
The early detection and identification of wine spoilage microbes can be done by using
microbial physiological techniques, including plating in selective and differential media
(Kántor and Kačániová, 2015), molecular detection like PCR-based DGGE analysis, and
qRT-PCR, among others (Mills et al., 2008), and by metabolomics.
The composition of wine is determined by a complex interplay between environmental
factors, genetic factors, and viticulture practices (Roullier-Gall et al., 2014), and
metabolomics offers the toolbox for integrated analyses of the wine composition
resulting from all of these factors. Metabolomics approaches have shown great potential
for the study of grapes and wines (Flamini, 2014). The concept of wine omics for the
untargeted wine analysis coupling NMR and GC-MS were followed by the oenomics
approaches. All inclusive analysis require access to sensitive and powerful instruments.
Therefore, metabolomics employs high-resolution techniques, such as FTICR-MS,
LC-MS, GC-MS, and NMR spectroscopy, combined with multivariate statistics
(Roullier-Gall et al., 2014).

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

275

Figure 9.5: Aspergillus conidiophore (A1) and conidia (A2). Different black Aspergillus colonies from
berries from direct plating on Dichloran Rose Bengal Chloramphenicol (DRBC) agar homogenate
(B1), diluted and plated on DRBC (B2). Black rot of berries caused by black Aspergilli (C). Adapted
from Somma, S., Perrone, G., Logrieco, A.F., 2012. Diversity of black Aspergilli and mycotoxin risks in grape, wine
and dried vine fruits—review. Phytopathol. Mediterr. 51 (1), 131−147.

Metabolomics approaches have been used in different food matrices to identify compounds
related to a particular microbial contamination, usually via GC-MS, HPLC, SIFT-MS, and
NMR (Fig. 9.6) (Leroy et al., 2014).

2 Wine Microbial Spoilage
2.1 Acidic Wines: Can Wine Turn Into Vinegar?
Over the course of time, numerous winemaking strategies were developed, resulting in
a range of wine products, from Champagne to fortified wines like Port wine. However,
since the time of Louis Pasteur (around 1873) the microbial contribution to the production
of wine has become a subject of research and, often, debate (Mills et al., 2008). Pasteur
discovered that beers, wines, and many other fermented products were produced by yeast.

276

Chapter 9

Figure 9.6: Examples of Methods for Metabolic Analysis Aiming at the Establishment
and Analysis of Food/Wine Metabolomes.
Adapted from Leroy, F., Kerrebroeck, S.V., Vuyst, L., 2014. Metabolomics. In: Battt, C.A., Tortorello, M.L.,
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology, Elsevier, New York, pp. 780–787.

However, when a spoiling effect occurred, Pasteur found that the microorganisms present
in the beverage are much smaller than the yeast cells. Pasteur concluded that these smaller
microorganisms, called bacteria, caused wine to spoil into a vinegar-like product. Over 150
years later, winemakers still deal with this spoilage in wines today.
Volatile acidity (VA) is derived from acids of the acetic series in the “free state” and
combined as salts (Office International de la Vigne et du Vin, 2009). In extreme quantities,
volatile acids confer to the wine an unpleasant vinegar aroma/flavor associated with a sour
taste. The maximum acceptable limit for VA in most wines is 1.2 g/L of acetic acid (Office
International de la Vigne et du Vin, 2010). The aroma threshold for this acid depends on the
wine style and variety. An acetic acid concentration of 0.90 g/L can produce a clear bitter and
sour aftertaste in wine, still not causing a strong odor (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 2006a). Acetic
acid can be formed at the beginning of wine production (in grapes), during fermentation, and
in the bottled wine as a bacterial or yeast metabolite (Table 9.1) (Vilela-Moura et al., 2011).
Bacteria, in B. cinerea-infected grapes, can produce acetic acid. Due to rupture of grape
berry skin, B. cinerea infection permits access of bacteria to the berry’s interior. Acetobacter
species dominate on the surface of rotten grapes. These microorganisms use the ethanol
produced by wild yeasts as a carbon source, producing acetic acid (Du Toit and Lambrechts,

Table 9.1: Acetic acid in grapes and wines: microbial origin and range of concentrations.
Responsible Microorganism
Acetic Acid Bacteria
Grape musts

Alcoholic
fermentation
(AF)

Filamentous Fungi

S. cerevisiae

Lactic Acid Bacteria

• Oxidation of ethanol
• A. niger, A. tenuis, C. herbarum,
• Due to very rapid
to acetic acid by
R. arrhizus, and Penicillium
growth of indigenous
Gluconobacter spp.
spp., typically associated with
Lactobacilli (so-called
and Acetobacter spp.
sour rot, are responsible for
“ferocious”) in
in B. cinerea-infected
black fungal sporulation and
improperly treated
grapes (Du Toit and
typical sour rot symptoms—
freshly crushed
Lambrechts, 2002)
berry cracking and leakage
must, which leads to
• Unspoiled grapes (less
along with a pungent vinegar
high concentrations
than 102–103 cells/g of G.
smell (Rooney-Latham
of acetic acid,
oxydans, contain 0.016–
et al., 2008)
rather than lactic
0.023 g/L acetic acid
• Musts made with partially
acid (Boulton
• Spoiled grapes (as high
sour grapes can contain more
et al., 1996)
as 106 cells/g, mainly A.
than 1.0 g of acetic acid and
pasteurianus and A. aceti)
several grams of gluconic acid
contain up to 3.9 g/L
per litter (Ribéreau-Gayon
acetic acid (Joyeux
et al., 2006b)
et al., 1984a,b)
• Pasteurianus and A.
• Healthy grape • Mainly produced by
liquefaciens that survive
must with sugar
heterofermentative
during fermentation can
concentration
Oenococcus spp.,
also increase the acetic
(<220 g/L)
even if there is a
acid content of wines
can display
small residual sugar
and may cause wine
0.1–0.3 g/L of
concentration.
spoilage (Du Toit and
acetic acid
Acetic acid is
Lambrechts, 2002)
• Some S.
produced (0.12–
cerevisiae strains
0.24 g/L) from sugar
produce more
after their growth
than 1 g/L of
phase associated
acetic acid
with MLF (Ribéreau(RibéreauGayon et al., 2006b)
Gayon
et al., 2006b)

Spoilage Yeast
• Hansenula spp. in unsulfited and
noninoculated must (RibéreauGayon et al., 2006b)
• B. bruxellensis is also thought
to be associated with grape
contamination (Zuehlke
et al., 2013)

• P. anomala, Candida krusei, and
C. stellata (Fleet and Heard,
1993), as well as Hanseniaspora
uvarum/K. apiculate (Romano
et al., 1992), produce high levels
of acetic acid (1–2, 1–1.3, and
1–2.5 g/L, respectively) before
and during initial fermentation
steps, leading to serious
wine deterioration (Fleet and
Heard, 1993)
• S. ludwiggii strains can produce
acetic acid concentrations
higher than 0.75 g/L (Romano
et al., 1999)
(Continued)

Table 9.1: Acetic acid in grapes and wines: microbial origin and range of concentrations.
Responsible Microorganism
Acetic Acid Bacteria
MFL

Wine

• A substantial increase in
acetic acid (0.5–3.5 g/L
for 1 × 103–9 × 104 cfu/
mL) and a decrease in
ethanol concentration
was correlated to an
increase in A. pasteurianus
population (Bartowsky
and Henschke, 2008)

Filamentous Fungi

S. cerevisiae

Lactic Acid Bacteria
• The decarboxylation
of malic acid
into lactic acid
by LAB (O. oeni
and L. plantarum),
is associated
with changes in
the amino acid
composition and
increment in acetic
acid concentration
(0.05–0.32 g/L) of
the initial VA (PozoBayón et al., 2005)
• Lactobacillus,
Pediococcus,
and Leuconostoc
spp., almost
nondetectable in
wine, cause spoilage
when growth occurs
by producing 0.8–
6.1 g/L acetic acid
(Sponholz, 1993)

Spoilage Yeast

• Species of the genus Dekkera/
Brettanomyces (Boulton
et al., 1996; Pretorius, 2000)
produce acetic acid up to
7.2 g/L (Sponholz, 1993)

LAB, Lactic acid bacteria; MLF, malolactic fermentation; VA, volatile acidity.
Source: Adapted from Vilela-Moura, A., Schuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Silva, R.F., Chaves, S.R, Sousa, M.J. Côrte-Real, M., 2011. The impact of acetate metabolism on yeast fermentative performance and wine
quality: reduction of volatile acidity of grape-musts and wines—minireview. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 89, 271–280.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

279

2002). Fungi associated with sour rot, such as Aspergillus niger, Alternaria tenuis,
Cladosporium herbarum, Rhizopus arrhizus, and Penicillium spp. can also be responsible for
the manifestation of acidic musts, with more than 1.0 g/L of acetic acid (Ribéreau-Gayon et
al., 2006b; Rooney-Latham et al., 2008) (Table 9.1).
Saccharomyces cerevisiae produce acetic acid as a byproduct of alcoholic fermentation,
mostly at the start of fermentation. This production is dependent on the yeast strain, grapemust composition, and must nitrogen concentration (Delfini and Costa, 1993; Torrens et
al., 2008; Vilanova et al., 2007). In response to sugars hyperosmotic stress, yeasts, in wine,
produce acetic acid to equilize the redox balance. This phenomenom is particularly severe
in grape-must with a ºBrix (sugar content) higher than 35 (Erasmus et al., 2004). Yeasts,
such as Dekkera/Brettanomyces (Sponholz, 1993), and apiculated wine yeasts, such as
Hanseniaspora/Kloeckera (Ciani and Maccarelli, 1998), can produce acetic acid up to 7.2
g/L. At the end of the fermentation process and during wine storage S. ludwigii, a spoilage
yeast frequently isolated from wine, can also produce detrimental amounts of acetic acid
(Romano et al., 1999).
The decarboxylation of malic acid into lactic acid by lactic acid bacteria (BAL) during MLF
is associated with changes in the amino acid content of wines, leading to an increase of the
initial VA (Pozo-Bayón et al., 2005). Starter cultures of Oenococcus oeni, under pantothenic
acid deprivation due to CoA deficiency, can produce acetate (Richter et al., 2001). This
production is also due to competition between yeasts and bacterial populations during
concurrent MLFs (Boulton et al., 1996). Acetic acid bacteria (Acetobacter pasteurianus
and A. liquefaciens) can also increase the acetic acid content of wines and may cause wine
spoilage (Du Toit and Lambrechts, 2002). Furthermore, after bottling, red wines under
peculiar circumstances, may carry a small population of acetic acid bacteria that proliferates
in bottles stored in an upright position (Bartowsky and Henschke, 2008) (Table 9.1).

2.2 Ester Taint: Banana or Glue?
Yeasts strains belonging to the species, Hanseniaspora uvarum, Kloeckera apiculata,
Metschnikowia pulcherrima, and P. anomala, can be responsible for ester taint in wines,
especially if their growth is not controlled during the initial stages of alcoholic fermentation
(Loureiro and Malfeito-Ferreira, 2003). The compounds formed are the esthers ethyl acetate,
with an acetone/glue aroma, and methylbutyl acetate, that presents as banana or pear drops
with a fruity aroma.
The presence of too much ethyl acetate in wine is not wanted due to its unpleasant acetone/
glue aroma, especially if it is present in concentrations above 100–200 mg/L (Cliff and
Pickering, 2006). Ethyl acetate is formed in wine through the action of yeast or via
esterification. The final concentration is dependent on the species of yeast and the wine
composition (Plata et al., 2003).

280

Chapter 9

Carbonic maceration, must aeration, must clarification, and yeast species play an important
role in the amounts of isoamyl acetate formed in wines. This compound possesses a bananalike odor and may also impart some complexity to neutral white wines and to red and white
premier wines. When present in excess it can cover the varietal character of wines (RibéreauGayon et al., 2006a).
Growth of Z. bailii may also lead to wine with an increase in acetic and succinic acid,
a decrease of l-malic acid, reduction in total acidity, and an altered ester concentration
(Boulton et al., 1996).

2.3 “Brett Character” and Mousy Taint: Unpleasant Horsy Aroma and Mice Taste
in Wines
Some wine microorganisms can produce volatile phenols (vinylphenols and ethylphenols)
from grape p-coumaric and ferulic acids. Brettanomyces bruxellensis produce abovethreshold concentrations of “phenolic,” “animal,” or “stable” odor-active ethylphenols like
4-ethylphenol (4-EP) and 4-ethylguaiacol (4-EG), by decarboxylation of the trans-ferulic and
trans-p-coumaric precursor compounds present in wine (Chatonnet et al., 1997).
Dekkera and its anamorph Brettanomyces are considered spoilage yeast and are probably
the most important organisms responsible for the production of volatile phenols (Chatonnet
et al., 1992). They are not among the most dominant microorganisms during fermentation;
however, in wines and in other fermented beverages, such as beer and cider, they can be found
after 6–10 months of storage (Cocolin et al., 2004). Optimal substrates for the proliferation
of Brettanomyces are wood barrels. Wine maturation and storage in wood, with lower levels
of sulfur dioxide, some dissolved oxygen, and storage at higher temperature than at any
other time, provides both the time and the lack of competition needed for Brettanomyces to
successfully grow to levels that result in wine sensory defects (Lin et al., 2014). For all these
reasons, it is thought that the time between the completion of alcoholic fermentation and the
start of MLF is the most likely time when Brettanomyces multiplies and produces “Brett
character” in wine (Lin et al., 2014). Furthermore, it is thought that these yeasts can also
multiply after bottling if the wine contains residual fermentable sugars, a situation made more
likely if the wine was minimally filtered (Du Toit and Pretorius, 2000).
Nevertheless, Brettanomyces occurs almost exclusively in red wines. Red wines have a much
higher level of phenolic acids than white wines, since they are extracted from the grape
skins during red wine fermentation. The mechanism of conversion involves a sequence of
two enzymatic reactions. The wine yeast S. cerevisiae and some LAB, such as Lactobacillus
have enzymes (decarboxilases), which degrade these acids to weakly smelling intermediates
like 4-vinylphenol and 4-vinylguaiacol. These compounds, by the enzimatic mechanism
of Brettanomyces, are transformed to the off-odors 4-ethylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol,
respectively (Chatonnet et al., 1995). In wine, Brettanomyces is the only yeast that can

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

281

Figure 9.7: Structures and Chemical Properties of 4-Ethylguaiacol (4-EG) and 4-Ethylphenol (4-EP).

produce from 4-vinylphenol the horsy smelling 4-ethylphenol. Usually, 4-ethylphenol is
considered to impart the characteristic “Brett character” aroma profile of Brettanomyces wine
contamination (Couto et al., 2005) (Figs. 9.7 and 9.8).
The perception threshold of EPs (4-ethylphenols, designated as 4-ethylphenol and
4-ethylguaiacol) is greatly influenced by the matrix in which they are dissolved. The values
reported by Chatonnet et al. (1992)—440 µg/L for 4-EP and 135 µg/L for 4-EG—were found
in a model solution. In red wines the 4-ethylphenol presents a detection threshold of 230 µg/L
(Chatonnet et al., 1990) while the combination of 4-ethylphenol with 4-ethylguaiacol shows a
threshold of 400 µg/L (Chatonnet et al., 1992) and this happens when active Brettanomyces in
the wine overcome 103 cells/mL (Chatonnet et al., 1995; Lonvaud-Funel and Renouf, 2005).
The concentration of 4-EP found in 61 bottled commercial Australian red wines, of various
ages, ranging from 2 µg/L in a Merlot up to 2660 µg/L in a Shiraz, with a mean concentration
of 795 µg/L. 4-EG was also detected in every red wine analyzed, ranging in concentration
from 1 µg/L (in a Pinot noir) up to 437 µg/L (in a Merlot) with a mean concentration of 99
µg/L (Pollnitz et al., 2000).
However, the presence of 4-vinylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol, in wine, can be due to the
metabolism of Saccharomyces yeast during grape-must fermentation (Gunata et al., 1990).
Meaden and Taylor (1991) cloned and identified a nuclear gene phenolic off-flavor (POF
1) that confers, to the yeast S. cerevisiae, the ability to carry out the decarboxylation of pcoumaric and ferulic acid. Grando et al. (1993) verified the character expressed by strains
Pof+ and Pof– in fermentation of Traminer grape-musts, confirming the influence of the yeast
strain Pof phenotype from analytical results of 4-vinylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol and from
sensorial evaluation. Some of the genetic and environmental factors that affect Pof phenotype
on S. cerevisiae are today well understood (Howell et al., 2005).

282

Chapter 9

Figure 9.8: Formation of Ethylphenols from Hydroxycinnamic Precursors.

Under laboratory conditions, volatile phenols can also be produced by LAB (Cavin et al.,
1993; Couto et al., 2006). Cavin et al. (1993) found that strains of the genera Lactobacillus
and Pediococcus can produce volatile phenols. Couto et al. (2006) after testing 20 different
species of LAB (35 strains) found that only L. plantarum–type strain NCFB1752 produced
the predictable quantity of 4-vinylphenol and 4-ethylphenol from p-coumaric acid. However,
the production of these off-flavors by L. plantarum NCFB1752 was affected by the growth
conditions/environmental factors (Silva et al., 2011a, 2011b) and yielded lower concentration
of these compounds than those normally obtained by Dekkera/Brettanomyces yeasts,
considered to be the principal agents responsible for volatile phenols in wine (Fras et al.,
2014).
Besides “Brett character” Brettanomyces also can produce mousy wines. This wine defect
appears due to the metabolism of ornithine and lysine that leads to the production of extremely
powerful and unpleasant nitrogen-heterocylic compounds [2-acetyltetrahydropyridine

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

283

(ACTPY), 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline (ACPY), and 2-ethyltetrahydropyridine (ETPY)] (Costello
and Henschke, 2002). These molecules are recognized on the back palate (retro-nasal area)
as a persistent aftertaste suggestive of caged mice (Grbin et al. 1996). The temperature of
the mouth (near 36°C) associated with the pH of basic saliva neutralizes the wine’s acid pH.
This unpleasent flavor is perceived in the mouth and is often called “mice taste” (Grbin and
Henschke, 2000).
The minimum population of yeast required for producing “mice taste wines” or “horsy
wines” may account for the differences in the incidence of these two Dekkera/Brettanomyces
spoilage phenomena. Chatonnet et al. (1995) determined that a population of 3 × 103 cells/
mL was sufficient to produce an above-threshold concentration of 4-ethylphenol in a red
wine, while based on the data presented by Grbin and Henschke (2000), a higher population
could be necessary for mousy off-flavor development.

2.4 Formation of Ethyl Carbamate and Biogenic Amines
The amino acid metabolism by microorganisms can have implications on quality and safety
of fermented food products. For bacteria, the amino acid use can increase their ability to
obtain energy, particularly in media with nutrient limitation and in response to acid stress
(Cotter and Hill, 2003).
Arginine is one of the amino acids present in higher concentrations, in must and wine. The
wine lactic acid bacteria degrade arginine by arginine deaminase pathway that involves three
enzymes: arginine deaminase (ADI, EC 3.5.3.6), ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC, EC
2.1.3.3), and carbamate kinase (CK, EC 2.7.2.2) (Lasik, 2013; Liu, 2002; Manca de Nadra
et al., 2003; Mira de Orduna et al., 2001). Its degradation yields citrulline and carbamoyl
phosphate, precursors of ethyl carbamate, a potentially carcinogenic compound. This
compound, also referred to as urethane, results from a spontaneous chemical reaction involving
ethanol and precursors including urea, citrulline, carbamoyl phosphate, N-carbamyl α- and
β-aminoacids and allantoin (Ough et al., 1988a). The ethanolysis reaction of citrulline and urea
(from the metabolism of arginine by yeasts) (Vincenzini et al., 2009) to form ethyl carbamate
can occur at elevated temperatures or at normal storage temperatures (Ough et al., 1988a). The
presence of the three enzymes of the ADI pathway appears to occur in most heterofermentative
genera, Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Oenococcus, although already detected in some
homofermentative LAB species isolated from wine. However, the degradation of arginine by
this pathway, in all species, seems to be a strain-dependent phenotype (Spano et al., 2006).
The genes involved in the degradation of arginine are arranged in arc operon. While this
operon structure presents variations between different species of LAB, the genes coding for
arginine deaminase (arcA); ornithine transcarbamylase (arcB), and carbamate kinase (arcC)
are always present (Divol et al., 2003). This operon has been described in Lactobacillus
hilgardii (Arena et al., 2002, 2013), O. oeni (Inês, 2007; Mira de Orduna et al., 2001; Nehmé

284

Chapter 9

et al., 2006), L. plantarum (Spano et al., 2006), and L. sake (Zuniga et al., 2002). In wine,
prolonged contact of LAB (viable and viable but not culturable) with the yeast lees should
be considered as a significant risk factor for the increased formation of citrulline and thus
ethyl carbamate (Terrade and Mira de Orduna, 2006; Tonon and Lonvaud-Funel, 2000). So,
it is not advisable to use strains of O. oeni that excrete citrulline as starter cultures. Some of
these authors also suggest that strains having only the first pathway enzyme (ADI+, OTC–) or
strains that have ADI but low OTC activity should be excluded in the process of selection of
starters for the realization of MLF. According to Vincenzini et al. (2009), urea is considered
the major precursor for urethane in wine and it can be released by wine yeasts as a metabolic
intermediate from arginine breakdown by arginase enzyme. Urea excretion principally occurs
during the first stages of fermentation and is potentiated by conditions of high availability of
quickly assimilable nitrogen sources.
The BA are organic low molecular weight bases, which can be produced and degraded
during normal metabolic activity of animals, plants, and microorganisms (Arena and
Manca de Nadra, 2001). In humans, these substances may play an important metabolic
role related to growth (polyamines) or functions of the nervous and circulatory systems
(histamine and tyramine). When BA are ingested in excess they can cause hypotension,
hypertension, heart palpitations (vasoactive amines), headaches (psychoactive amines), and
various allergic reactions (De las Rivas et al., 2005; Kushnereva, 2015; Lonvaud-Funel,
2001). The BA are essentially formed from the decarboxylation of their respective precursor
amino acids (Guerrini et al., 2002; Lasik, 2013; Lonvaud-Funel, 1999; Marcobal et al.,
2006a,b; Vincenzini et al., 2009). Thus, amines histamine, tyramine, tryptamine, serotonin,
2-phenylethylamine, agmatine, and cadaverine are formed from the amino acids histidine,
tyrosine, tryptophan, hydroxytryptophan, phenylalanine, arginine, and lysine, respectively
(Buckenhüskes, 1993; Henríquez-Aedo et al., 2016; Kalac and Krizec, 2003). The aliphatic
volatile amines (methylamine, ethylamine, and isoamylamine) can be originated by the
amination of nonnitrogen compounds, such as aldehydes and ketones. The putrescine may be
formed from agmatine or ornithine and the polyamines spermidine and spermine are formed
from putrescine by binding aminopropyl groups catalyzed by spermidine synthase and
spermine synthase (Vincenzini et al., 2009).
The formation of biogenic amines (BA) by BAL may occur during the fermentation processes
of various raw materials for obtaining foods and beverages, such as cheese, sausages,
fermented vegetables, beer, and wine. Many bacteria have decarboxylase activities, which
promote growth and survival in acidic environments, by a pH increase. In wine, various
amino acids can be decarboxylated and therefore BA may be found, predominating histamine,
tyramine, putrescine, the isopentylamine, and phenylethylamine (Lonvaud-Funel, 2001;
Moreno-Arribas et al., 2003). Although some BA can be derived directly from grapes and
others result from the metabolic activity of the Saccharomyces and non-Saccharomyces yeast
and acetic bacteria, BA normally increase after MLF (Landete et al., 2005; Lonvaud-Funel,

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

285

2001; Pramateftaki et al., 2006; Torrea-Goni and Ancín-Azpilicueta, 2001). Results for yeast
contribution in the BA production are very contradictory. Caruso et al. (2002) found that
different species, such as K. apiculata, M. pulcherrima, B. bruxellensis, and S. cerevisiae
produced 2-phenethylamine and agmatine; however, Landete et al. (2007) stated that none
of the 36 yeast strains (belonging to 12 different species) evaluated for BA production were
able to produce BA (histamine, tyramine, 2-phenethylamine, putrescine, cadaverine, and
tryptamine) in synthetic medium and grape must. Among the LAB, the decarboxylase activity
is strain-specific and within different species of Lactobacillus, Pediococcus, Leuconostoc,
and Oenococcus is randomly distributed. In wine, however, their levels are much lower than
those described for other foods, though ethanol can enhance the toxic effect of histamine,
by inhibiting amino oxidases. Currently, most of the EU countries and Canada recommend
histamine levels not exceeding 10 mg/L, while in Germany the limit is 2 mg/L. Besides their
toxicity, at higher concentrations, BA may confer detectable unpleasant sensory changes,
such as putrescine and cadaverine, with rotten fruit and rotten flesh aromas, respectively. The
appearance of BA in wine has been linked to the existence of precursor amino acids, strains
with descarboxilase activity of factors that affect the growth of these strains, as well as some
enological practices (González-Marco and Ancín-Azpilicueta, 2006; Lonvaud-Funel, 2001;
Martín-Álvarez et al., 2006), such as nutrient addition, prolonged contact with grape skins
and lees (Lonvaud-Funel, 2001; Vincenzini et al., 2009) during fermentation process, because
they can directly affect the content of the precursor amino acids of BA (Vincenzini et al.,
2009). Red wines generally have higher contents of BA compared to pink, white, and fortified
wines (Bover-Cid et al., 2006; Landete et al., 2005; Leitão et al., 2000).

2.5 Oxidized Taint From Acetaldehyde: Grass, Green Apple, Sherry Taint
For human health, acetaldehyde causes some concern since it is also implicated in hangovers
and severe headaches. In wine it can impart some undesirable flavors, when above a certain
concentration. Acetaldehyde is an intermediate product of yeast fermentation; however,
it is more commonly associated with ethanol oxidation, catalyzed by the enzyme ethanol
dehydrogenase. Acetaldehyde production is also associated with the presence of surface-filmforming yeasts Candida sp., Pichia sp., and Hansenula sp., S. ludwigii, and bacteria, such
as acetic acid bacteria, which form the compound by the decarboxylation of pyruvate. The
sensory threshold for acetaldehyde is 100–125 mg/L (Carlton et al., 2007). Beyond this level,
it imparts a sherry-type character to the wine that can also be described as green/baked apple
and very ripe persimmon. Only in sherry wines, the oxidation character of acetaldehyde is
considered a typicity of the wine, and not a wine fault. In this type of wines the acetaldehyde
concentration may reach to values closer to 500 mg/L (Zoecklein et al., 1995).
However, wine aroma is influenced by complex interactions between various wine constituents.
Recently, Coetzee et al. (2016) investigated the sensory interactive effects of Sauvignon Blanc
impact compounds, 3-mercaptohexan-1-ol and 3-isobutyl-2-methoxypyrazine, Sauvignon

286

Chapter 9

Blanc sensory markers, with acetaldehyde. They found that complex sensory interactions
may occur between these compounds and one of the main oxidation-derived compounds,
acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde can enhance or suppress pleasant fruity characters depending on
the concentration.

2.6 Production of Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are small molecules (MW∼700), natural grape contaminants, that are very toxic
chemical products produced as secondary metabolits by a few fungal species. The most
important include AFs, fumonisins (FB1 and FB1), and ochratoxin A (OTA) (García-Cela et
al., 2012; Hathout and Aly, 2014). The conditions necessary for the production of mycotoxins
by fungal, depends on availability of nutrients, moisture, pH, temperature, and strain (Fung
and Clark, 2004). The most dangerous mycotoxins are the AFs, which are mainly produced by
A. flavus and A. parasiticus (Hathout and Aly, 2014). The chemical structure of AFs consists
in a difuranocoumarin derivate produced by a polyketide pathway (García-Cela et al., 2012).
Ochratoxins are produced by filamentous fungal species belonging to the genera Penicillium
and Aspergillus (Caronel et al., 2011; Gil-Serna et al., 2011). This mycotoxin is a colorless
crystalline compound. Its chemical structure consists of a dihydroisocoumarin moiety linked
to l-β-phenylalanine by a peptide bond (García-Cela et al., 2012; Quintela et al., 2012a,
2012b). Fumonisines were mainly produced by different strains of Fusarium (Friavad et al.,
2007), with fumonisin B1 being the most important and chemically the diester of propane1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid and 2-amino-12,16-dimethyl-3,5,10,14,15-pentahydroxyeicosane
(Lino et al., 2004).

3 Current Methods for the Reduction of Volatile Acidity in Wines and
Grape Musts
Several methodologies, aiming to decrease excessive VA of acidic wines, have been proposed
(Vilela-Moura et al., 2011): (1) microbial stabilization of the acidic wine followed by
mixture with other wines, (2) reverse osmosis (RO) and nanofiltration, and (3) biological
removal of acetic acid through refermentation (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 2006b). In the first
approach the acidic wine is blended with other wines with low acetic acid. The acidic wine
can be sold for distillation to the ethanol industry, with economical losses for the producers.
RO and nanofiltration, two new membrane filtration techniques, can also be used for the
deacidification of wines. These methods produce an acetic-acid-rich permeate, which is then
treated by ion exchange to remove the acetic acid (Boulton et al., 1996). Several corporations
market RO systems for wine VA reduction. A Californian company (Vinovation) proposed
coupling RO and anion exchange resins (U.S. Patent No. 08/218,920), whereas, in a second
approach, the company “VA Filtration” proposes a combination of RO and selective
adsorption of acetic acid, with a reduction of 30% in VA on a single pass (VA Filtration,

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

287

2015). According to Massot et al. (2008), a third approach consists of the combination of two
stages of RO, where the targeted acid of the first permeate is transferred into a salty form and
then retained by the second stage RO membrane.

3.1 Biological Deacetification of Musts and Wines
In order to achieve wines with balanced sugar and acid contents, several approaches have
been developed for biodeacidification; however, they are limited to the metabolism of malic
acid (Bony et al., 1997; Husnik et al., 2007). Concerning VA, a genetically modified strain
that decreases acetate has been obtained (Remize et al., 2000). However, such a strain will
not be used for winemaking in the near future, due to the controversy regarding the use of
genetically modified foods in Europe (Schuller, 2010). Abnormally high concentrations
of acetic acid in wines can be removed by refermentation. Yeasts are able to metabolize
acetic acid during a refermentation process (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 2000a). Acording to
these authors and the works by Vilela-Moura et al. (2008, 2010, and 2011), one third of
acidic wine is mixed with two thirds of freshly crushed grapes or of the residual marc from
the fermentation of a finished wine (remaining pulp, after draining the newly made wine),
such that the VA of this mixture does not exceed 0.73 g/L of acetic acid. This empirical
methodology reduces VA to values closer to 0.37 g/L of acetic acid and has relatively low
costs (Zoecklein et al., 1995).
3.1.1 Acetic acid catabolism in yeast
As referred in the introduction, acetic acid in grape-must or wines can be the product of fungi,
bacteria, or yeast metabolism. The ability of yeasts to catabolize acetic acid can be especially
exploited to develop methods for the zymological deacidification of grape-musts or wines.
Acetate can be used as a sole carbon and energy source for the generation of energy and
cellular biomass under aerobic conditions (Schüller, 2003). In S. cerevisiae, acetate transport
and metabolism are subject to glucose repression. Therefore, when grown in medium
containing glucose and acetic acid, S. cerevisiae displays a diauxic growth with consumption
of acetic acid only after glucose reduction (Rodrigues, 1998). However, in chemostat cultures
of S. cerevisiae grown in mixtures of glucose and acetic acid, the glucose concentration can
be so low that the cells are no longer repressed and can metabolize acetate concomitantly
with glucose (dos Santos et al., 2003). This behavior is identical of the species Z. bailii, which
displays a biphasic growth in medium containing glucose and acetic acid (Sousa et al., 1998).
A review made by Vilela-Moura et al. (2011) discusses the catabolism of acetic acid in
yeast, including its cellular uptake/transport, which is important to stimulate its degradation
reducing acetic acid concentration in grape-musts and wines. In glucose-repressed yeast
cells at low pH, where acetic acid is mostly undissociated (pKa 4.75), it enters mainly by
simple diffusion (Casal et al., 1996). Ethanol enhances the passive influx acetic acid, which

288

Chapter 9

follows first-order kinetics with a rate constant that increases exponentially with ethanol
concentration (Casal et al., 1998). It is known that Jen1p is required for the uptake of lactate
in S. cerevisiae and can also transport other monocarboxylates, including acetate (Casal et
al., 1999). The protein Ady2p was later found to be essential for acetate transport activity in
acetic acid-grown cells (Paiva et al., 2004). When available as the sole carbon and energy
source, acetate is metabolized to acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by one of the two ACS
proteins: Acs1p (peroxisomal) or Acs2p (cytosolic). Acetyl-CoA is then oxidized in the
tricarboxylic acid cycle after entering mitochondria. It is also used to produce succinate
replenishing the cell with biosynthetic precursors by entering the glyoxylate cycle (Fig. 9.9),
which involves the key enzymes isocitrate lyase (Icl1p) and malate synthase (Mls1p) in the
cytosol and peroxisome, respectively (Vilela-Moura et al., 2011). In addition, acetyl-CoA is
used for synthesis of macromolecules, which requires active gluconeogenesis (Kruckeber and
Dickinson, 2004).

Figure 9.9: Cell Compartmentation of Acetate Metabolism in Yeast.
When available as the sole carbon and energy source, acetate is metabolized to acetyl-CoA by one
of the two ACS proteins: Acs1p (peroxisomal) or Acs2p (cytosolic). Acetyl-CoA is then oxidized in
the tricarboxylic acid cycle after entering mitochondria. It is also used to produce succinate and
hence replenish the cell with biosynthetic precursors by entering the glyoxylate cycle, which involves
the key enzymes isocitrate lyase (Icl1p) and malate synthase (Mls1p) in the cytosol and peroxisome,
respectively. In addition, acetyl-CoA is used for synthesis of macromolecules, which requires active
gluconeogenesis (Vilela-Moura, 2010).

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

289

Figure 9.10: Growth and Color Change (due to pH Changes) of the Differential Medium,
With 0.5% (v/v) Acetic Acid, 0.05% (w/v) Glucose, and Bromocresol Green 0.005% (w/v),
at pH 4.0, Indicating Simultaneous Consumption of Glucose and Acetic Acid by the Isolated
Strains 30, 43, 44, and 45C.
(A) S. cerevisiae PYCC 4072 (negative control); (B) Z. bailii ISA1307 (positive control). Adapted from
Schuller, D., Côrte-Real, M., Leão, C., 2000. A differential medium for the enumeration of the spoilage yeast
Zygosaccharomyces bailii in wine. J. Food Prot. 63 (11), 1570–1575; Vilela, A., Amaral, C., Shuller, D.,
Mendes-Faia, A., Corte-Real, M., 2015. Combined use of Wallerstein and Zygosaccharomyces bailii modified
differential media to isolate yeasts for the controlled reduction of volatile acidity of grape musts and wines. J.
Biotechnol. Res. 6, 43–53.

3.1.2 Volatile acidity bioreduction by Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strains
Vilela et al. (2015) isolated several yeast strains (Saccharomyces and non-Saccharomyces) in
Wallerstein Laboratory Nutrient Agar (WL) medium from refermentation processes of acidic
wines, at winery scale. Among these isolates, 135 were tested for their ability to consume
acetic acid in the presence of glucose, using a differential medium adapted of the one created
by Schuller et al. (2000) containing acetic acid and glucose. Four isolates (Fig. 9.10) were
obtained in this medium and were characterized by molecular methods that confirmed the
presence of a non-Saccharomyces strain (L. thermotolarans coded as 44C) and three isolates
of S. cerevisiae (30, 43, and 45C) (Vilela et al., 2015).
Vilela-Moura et al. (2008) also found that consumption of glucose and acetic acid was,
likewise, an attribute of commercial wine yeasts. They characterized nine S. cerevisiae

290

Chapter 9

commercial strains regarding this particular physiological feature. Among the strains studied,
S26, S29, and S30 displayed a simultaneous consumption pattern of glucose and acetic
acid. Afterward, these strains were further assessed in simulated refermentation assays
of acidic wines with a synthetic culture medium containing high glucose and low ethanol
concentrations, simulating the process of refermentation with a grape-must; and low glucose
and high ethanol concentrations, simulating the process of refermentation with a marc.
Commercial strain S29 was the most efficient one in the simulated refermentation assay with
must, and under low oxygen availability. Conversely, for the simulated refermentation assay
with marc, under aerobic conditions, S26 was the most efficient acetic acid-degrading strain.
Under limited-aerobic conditions all the S. cerevisiae strains evaluated displayed acetic acid
degradation efficiencies identical to Z. bailii ISA 1307. Remarkably, S26 strain also revealed
capacity to decrease 92% and 61%, the VA of wines, without the addition of grape-must or
marcs, in aerobic and limited aerobic conditions, respectively (Vilela-Moura et al., 2008).
3.1.3 Effects of ethanol, acetic acid, sulfur dioxide, and microoxygenation (MO) on the removal
of volatile acidity from acidic wines by Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
Upon inoculation of grape-must, yeast cells need to adapt to a fermentative environment
that gradually changes during fermentation and that imposes multiple stress conditions, such
as high osmolarity, low pH (2.9–3.8; Pizarro et al., 2007), sulfur dioxide (SO2) presence
between 40 and 100 mg/L (Ribéreau-Gayon et al., 2000a), ethanol toxicity (Ribéreau-Gayon
et al., 2000a), temperature variations (Pizarro et al., 2007), and increasing nitrogen limitation
(Martínez-Moreno et al., 2012). A refermentation process that aims to reduce excessive
VA imposes additional stress due to elevated acetic acid concentrations that may lead to a
reduced cellular growth, cellular death, and, consequently, to stuck fermentations (Eglinton
and Henschke, 1999). A controlled oxygen environment is also important for yeast acetic acid
consumption (Vilela-Moura et al., 2008).
Controlled wine oxygenation is currently achieved through microoxygenation (MO). By
this technique small amounts of oxygen are delivered along fermentation. Oxygen is usually
added by a stainless steel sparger that produces small bubbles, promoting the dissolution of
oxygen. The aim of MO is to provide oxygen at a rate equal to or slightly less than the wine’s
oxygen consumption rate, to avoid the buildup of too much oxygen in the wine (Llaudy et al.,
2006; Tao et al., 2007). This procedure has an impact on multiple aspects of wine production,
such as increased production of sterols and other fatty acids by yeast (Zoecklein et al.,
1995), removal of unwanted reductive flavors (Paul, 2002), and reduced vegetative aromas
(McCord, 2003).
The influence of different combinations of the initial concentration of acetic acid, ethanol,
sulfur dioxide, and MO on acetic acid removal from acidic wines by two commercial S.
cerevisiae strains S26 and S29 was evaluated by Vilela-Moura et al. (2010a,b). Both strains
reduced the VA of an acidic wine [1.0 g/L acetic acid, 11% (v/v) ethanol] by 78 and 48%,

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

291

respectively. Strain S26 revealed better removal efficiency due to its higher tolerance to
stress factors imposed by acidic wines. Sulfur dioxide (SO2) in the concentration range
95–170 mg/L inhibited the ability of both strains to reduce the VA of the acidic wine under
the experimental conditions used. Deacidification of wines with the better performing
strain was associated with changes in the concentration of volatile compounds. Moreover,
deacidification led to an increased on fatty acids concentration, but still within the range of
values described for spontaneous fermentations, and with apparently no negative impact on
the organoleptical properties (Vilela-Moura et al., 2010a).
Afterward, the applicability of the aforementioned characterized commercial and
indigenous S. cerevisiae strains for the deacidification of white and red wines at a pilot
scale was determined (Vilela-Moura et al., 2010b). The effect of the refermentation
process, as well as MO (20 mg/Lh of oxygen applied with a MicroSafeO2) on acetic
acid removal efficiency and wine aromatic composition was assessed in a red wine.
The commercial strains S26 and S29 efficiently reduced both acetic acid (43 and 47%,
respectively) and sugar (100%) after 264 h of refermentation of an acidic white wine that
was supplemented with grape must. Similar results (60%–66% of acetic acid removal)
were observed for red wine deacidification using grape must, independently of MO. Wines
obtained by refermentation with the must had significantly lower acetic acid and a higher
total SO2 concentration in comparison to the wines deacidified by the grape marcs. The
volatile aroma compound’s composition of deacidified red wines was dependent on the
refermentation process used, rather than on MO. The marc-deacidified wine obtained by
the use of strain S26 and without MO achieved the best sensory classification. When data
from all analytical and sensory evaluation were combined, principal component analysis
separated the wines into three distinct groups according to the strain and the refermentation
process independently of MO (Vilela-Moura et al., 2010b).
3.1.4 Bioreduction of volatile acidity by immobilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells
Cell immobilization by entrapment in beads is a technique that received increasing attention
in recent years, resulting in a great number of applications in industry (Yamada et al.,
2002), medicine, and agriculture (Liu et al., 2007). Compared with suspension cultures,
this technique offers the advantages of continuous cell utilization in addition to the
protection of immobilized cells against inhibitory substances in the fermentation medium,
increased fermentation rates, stimulation of production, and protection from shear forces
(Riley et al., 1990).
Vilela et al. (2013) studied the efficiency of acetic acid removal from acidic wines by
immobilized cells of the previously characterized commercial strain S26. The effect of
different parameters for cellular immobilization, such as cell concentration, initial pH, and
number/composition of the immobilization matrix on the deacidification process efficiency
was also determined. Immobilized cells using double layer alginate-chitosan beads were

292

Chapter 9

Figure 9.11: SEM Image of S. Cerevisiae S26 Cells, Entrapped in Double Layer (DL)
Alginate-Chitosan Beads.
(A) Internal yeast cells distribution of a double-layer bead with alginate 2.0% (w/v) and chitosan 1.0% (w/v) after
deacidification at pH 3.12 (10,000×); (B) External layer (chitosan 1.0%, w/v) of a bead after deacidification,
pH 3.12 (5,000×) (Vilela et al., 2013).

able to reduce 21.6% of the initial VA of an acidic wine (1.1 g/L acetic acid) with 12.5%
(v/v) ethanol and pH 3.5, after 72 h. Deacidification did not change after 168 h and was
associated with a slight ethanol decrease and cell leakage from the beads. Duplication of
initial cell concentration and pH adjustment to 3.12 lead to an increase of VA removal up to
61.8%, depending on the initial acetic acid concentration. No cell leakage occurred during
the process, whereas ethanol decreased slightly (0.7%, v/v). SEM analysis of immobilized
cells confirmed these results, suggesting that the initial pH value is critical for beads integrity
maintenance (Fig. 9.11). Thus, immobilized S26 cells in double layer alginate-chitosan beads
appear to be an efficient alternative to improve wine quality by correction of excessive VA. In
summary, the results mentioned earlier, are the basis to develop efficient and cheap enological
solutions for the rectification of VA of wines using free or immobilized select yeast strains.

4 Role of LAB on Wine Safety and Quality
LAB are important since they perform the MLF reducing the wine acidity, important in
red wines contributing to microbiological stability and sensory quality of the final product
(Maicas, 2001; Sumby et al., 2014). Phenolic compounds, mainly phenolic acids and
their esters and some flavonols, stimulate bacterial growth (Campos et al., 2003) and are
metabolized during MLF, but LAB also increase the wine with new phenolic compounds not
detected in the initial wine (Hernández et al., 2007). Consequently, it may be suggested that
LAB could be among the factors that contribute to the antioxidant activity of wine. There are
also LAB species with potential to hydrolyze tannins. Tannin acyl hydrolase (E.C. 3.1.1.20),

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

293

commonly called tannase, catalyzes the hydrolysis of ester bonds in hydrolyzable tannins,
such as tannic acid, thereby releasing glucose and gallic acid (Aguilar and Gutierrez-Sanchez,
2001). This enzyme also hydrolyzes the esters bonds from polyphenols, avoiding their
polymerization, giving a wine with a high content of aromatic compounds and appropriate
color, increasing its quality. The tannase activity could be considered an important criterion
for the selection of malolactic starter cultures (Buckenhüskes, 1993) since it may confer
advantages in the winemaking process by reducing astringency and haze in wine (Vaqueres
Vaquero et al., 2004).
Is well known that LAB are considered health beneficial microorganisms because they are
traditionally used in the production of fermented food and feed products, and because they
have several well-known probiotic properties, thus being considered as GRAS (generally
recognized as safe) microorganisms. Lately, they also began to be recognized for their ability
to detoxify mycotoxins (Dalié et al., 2010; Salminen et al., 2010), thus being considered a
promising solution to reduce exposure to dietary mycotoxins. This unusual LAB characteristic
is strain specific and involves adsorption and metabolization mechanisms. Ochratoxin A (OTA)
is one of the most prominent mycotoxins found in agricultural commodities, including wine.
It was reported by Abrunhosa et al. (2014) that the ability of Pediococcus parvulus strains
isolated from Douro wines that spontaneously underwent MLF to detoxify OTA. These strains
have a potential value that can be exploited for applications in food and feed, as probiotic for
animal nutrition, as inoculants for silages, as biocontrol agents in crop fields, as starter cultures
for fermented products, and/or as starter cultures for wine MLFs.
Beside OTA removal or degradation, also BA degradation is another important role of LAB
in the destruction of metabolites of microbial origin with an impact on consumer health
(Russo et al., 2016). BA in wine represent a toxicological risk for the health of the consumer,
with several trade implications. Capozzi et al. (2012) isolated wine L. plantarum strains able
to degrade BA, thus with added potential for being used as malolactic starter cultures. In a
recent study, Callejón et al. (2014) verified a high degradative power of histamine, tyramine,
and putrescine by wine LAB strains belonging to L. plantarum and P. acidilactici species.

5 Preventive Treatments to Avoid Brettanomyces sp. Wine
Contamination
5.1 Sulfur Dioxide
The most commonly used additive to control the growth of microorganisms in wine is sulfur
dioxide (SO2). However, starting from the late 1970s, the use of sulfite in food has been
questioned because of its allergenicity identified by the European Food Safety Authority
(EFSA, 2004). EFSA, leading the European Union (EU), the USA, Australia, and other
countries to implement labeling frameworks for foods containing more than 10 mg/L of this
additive (European Union, 2011). The addition of this compound is legal and effective, and it

294

Chapter 9

can inhibit the growth of Dekkera/Brettanomyces when the concentration of free SO2 is just
under 20 mg/L at pH 3.6–3.7 (Chatonnet et al., 1993).
Portugal et al. (2014) compared several antimicrobial agents, such as dimethyl dicarbonate
(DMDC), chitosan, potassium metabisulphite (PMB), and enological tannins against
Brettanomyces, and they verify that PMB was the most efficient antimicrobial agent in
concentrations near the usually applied legal limits for enology. PMB efficiency was also studied
in red wines naturally contaminated by Brettanomyces. Volatile phenols levels were quantified
after long aging of the wines treated with PMB. The results obtained showed that there is a
negative correlation between the concentrations of PMB employed and the concentrations of
4-ethylphenol, 4-ethylguaiacol, 4-propylguaiacol, and Brettanomyces populations in the studied
wine. For wine industry it was important that it was verified that 100 mg/L of total PMB could
prevent efficiently Brettanomyces growth in the storage red wines and that volatile phenols
concentrations were significantly (P < 0.05) higher in wines with lower levels of PMB.

5.2 Chitosan
Chitosan is a chitin-derived polysaccharide extracted from crustaceous or fungi species.
Chitosan, the deacetylated form of chitin, is an important polyssaccharide because of the
high density of amino groups present. In 2011, the use of chitosan in winemaking has been
authorized by the EU (Reg. EU 53/2011) for heavy metals, iron and copper cloudiness (100
g/hL) contaminant removal, special ochratoxin A (500 g/hL), and for control and reduction of
undesirable Brettanomyces spp. population (10 g/hL).
The antimicrobial activity of chitosan has been mainly explained by its positive electrical
charge, which is incremented at acid pH and with higher chitosan degrees of deacetylation,
so, a higher positive charge densityis directly correlated with antimicrobial effectiveness
of chitosan (Kong et al., 2010). Portugal et al. (2014) showed that chitosan inhibitory
effect against B. bruxellensis was identical in the presence or absence of 12.5% ethanol in
the culture broth, where 62 mg/L of chitosan were enough to reduce 90% of yeast wine
population (MIC50 and MIC90 were defined as the MIC, minimal inhibitory concentration,
that inhibited 50 and 90%, respectively, of the experimental microorganisms, where MBC50
and MBC90 means minimal biocidal concentration). In the presence of 12.5% of ethanol, the
MIC50 was also 62 mg/L. The MBC90 value was not obtained, because it was out of range of
chitosan concentrations used in this work. However, Gómez-Rivas et al. (2004) reported that
it is necessary to use 6 g/L of shell crab chitosan to completely inhibit Brettanomyces growth.

5.3 Dimethyl dicarbonate
Esters of pyrocarbonic acid, diethyldicarbonate (DEDC) and dimethyldicarbonate (DMDC),
are known since 1938 (Boehm and Mehta, 1938). DMDC due to this lower toxicicity is
usually prefered instead of DEDC, which releases ethyl carbamate from its degradation

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

295

(Schlatter and Lutz, 1990). DMDC is not a precursor of ethyl carbamate in wine, and
therefore does not present a potential carcinogenic risk. When 200 mg/L of DMDC were
applied to the wine, aromatic constitution was not altered (Ough, 1975). The hydrolysis of
DMDC in wine is fast: 1 h at 30°C and 5 h at 10°C (Delfini et al., 2002). The legal limit in
the United States, Australia, and European Union is 200 mg/L for several beverages (Costa
et al., 2008). The antimicrobial activity of DMDC is particularly effective when the pH is
low, and/or the concentration of DMDC and the temperature are high (Ough and Ingraham,
1961). The microorganism’s inhibition occurs prior to complete hydrolysis. The presence of
SO2 also increased the antimicrobial power of DMDC, even though the combination of SO2
and other preservatives (such as sorbic acid) reduced the effect of each component (Terrel
et al., 1993). When DMDC is hydrolized, this inhibits acetate kinase andl-glutamic acid
decarboxylase enzymes, and the enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and glyceraldehyde-3phosphate-dehydrogenase by methoxycarbonylation of the nucleophilic residues (imidazoles,
amines, thiols) (Renouf et al., 2008). These authors also showed that 150 mg/L is enough
to inhibit B. bruxellensis strains in different points of wine production: before and during
alcoholic fermentation, before MLF, and in finished wine. In the prebottling treatment, 200
mg/L was also efficient. Due to the need for specific dosing equipment, proper safety and
operator training, and maintaining the guarantee of a constant dosing, applying DMDC to
wine harbors significative cost for the industry (Boulton et al., 1996). Currently, the wineries
rent specialized equipment, as it is less expensive than buying them.

5.4 Weak Acids
Weak acids, such as sorbic and benzoic, are used extensively as preservatives in the food
industry, and their effects on the efficiency of thermal treatment are considered of outmost
importance (Guerzoni et al., 1990). Hydroxycinnamic acids (HCAs) may be also considered
as weak organic acids (Rosazza et al., 1995), and thus, their inhibition mechanism may be
postulated to resemble that of more common weak organic acids, such as acetic acid or lactic
acid. Under acidic conditions, undissociated weak acids, in general, diffuse through the
lipidic plasma membrane, reaching the more alkaline environment of the cytoplasm where
dissociation occurs. Damage to the cells follows, unless the pH is reestablished by the outpumping of H+, with energy dissipation (Warth, 1988).
HCAs are endogenous compounds of grapes and are considered natural food preservatives,
besides being precursors of volatile phenols. HCAs have been reported to inhibit the growth
of a variety of organisms, including plants, fungi, and bacteria (Campos et al., 2003). The
viability and intracellular pH changes in B. bruxellensis, in response to extracellular pH, as
well as to the presence of an energy source and HCAs, have been investigated by means of
fluorescent ratio imaging microscopy (FRIM) (Campolongo et al., 2014). The results obtained
by the authors show that B. bruxellensis is able to maintain viability and increase its pH
gradient with decreasing external pH values, whereas it is not able to maintain a pH gradient

296

Chapter 9

at high external pH values (i.e., pH 8) and, as a consequence, dies. The growth inhibitory
effects of ferulic and p-coumaric acid do not seem to be caused by a weak-acid inhibition
mechanism, since both acids induce a similar, or even higher, intracellular acidification
at a high external pH than at a low external pH. However, the results presented have to
be confirmed by using other strains of B. bruxellensins in order to validate the outcomes
obtained in these studies.

5.5 Enological Tannins
It is usually accepted that tannins can react with proteins, provoking precipitation of large
macromolecular aggregates in wine, mostly established by hydrophobic interactions and
hydrogen bonds. The antimicrobial activity of the tannins is related with those characteristics,
that is, it increased in the presence of ethanol (Portugal et al., 2014), once ethanol changed
the dielectric constant and modified hydrogen bonds, thus provoking cell flocculation and
changing the membrane properties (Soares, 2011). The presence of 12.5% ethanol in the
culture broth decreases substantially the quantity of tannins required to inhibit 50 and 90% of
B. bruxellensis strains (Portugal et al., 2014). Because of this, both MIC50 and MIC90 (MIC50
and MIC90 were defined as the MIC that inhibited 50% and 90%, respectively, of the tested
microorganisms, and an analogous definition was used for minimal biocidal concentration,
MBC50 and MBC90), lowered, respectively, from 0.5–1 to 0.12 mL/L. Tannins showed large
biocidal activity affecting 50% of the tested strains at a dosage of 0.25 mL/L in the presence
of 12.5% ethanol; however, the MBC90 value was above the legal limit (0.4 mL/L) for the
application of commercial enological tannins against B. bruxellensis in winemaking.

5.6 Reduction of Ethylphenol Precursors in Red Wines via the Formation
of Pyranoanthocyanins
Brettanomyces is able to produce from grape HCAs the vinylphenol (VPh) and ethyl
phenols (EPs) in two enzymatic steps. First the HCAs are decarboxilated to vinylphenols
by hydroxycinnamate decarboxilase (HCDC) enzyme, which is reduced to ethyl phenols by
vinylphenol reductase (Chatonnet et al., 1995) (Figs. 9.7 and 9.8).
It is possible to reduce precursors of EPs using HCDC + Saccharomyces yeasts during
fermentation to release VPs (Suárez-Lepe and Morata, 2012). These compounds are able to
rapidly react with grape anthocyanins forming vinylphenolic pyranoanthocyanins (VPAs)
(Morata et al., 2006). VPAs are stable pigments under winemaking conditions (Bakker and
Timberlake, 1997), decreasing at the same time the amount of EP precursors. There are only
a few amounts of hydroxycinnamic in grapes, as free acids or sterificated with tartaric acid,
these last ones can be slowly hydrolyzed in acidic polar media as wine. HCAs can increase
during the barrel ageing raising the precursors for EPs. Natural hydrolysis can be accelerated
using prior-to-fermentation cinnamyl esterases enzymes. These enzymes rapidly release

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

297

HCAs, then HCDC + S. cerevisiae strains transform HCAs in VPs by an enzymatic process.
At the end, VPs are able to react chemically with grape anthocyanins yielding VPAs. This
enzymatic-biological–chemical mechanism globally reduces the precursors for EPs (Morata
et al., 2013).

5.7 Pulsed Electric Field (PEF)
Pulsed electric field (PEF) technology constitutes one of the most novel technologies for the
pasteurization of foods due to its ability to inactivate pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms
at room temperature, without modifying the quality of food (Martín-Belloso and SobrinoLópez, 2011). Strong electric fields ranging from 26 to 35 kV/cm are produced in 1–4 µs pulses
between two electrodes contacting the product (Garde-Cerdán et al., 2007). Short-duration
high-intensity field strengths cause the electroporation of cell membranes and an increase in
their permeability (Zimmerman, 1986). Cell death is achieved as dielectric breakdown increases
permeability of the cytoplasmic and nuclear membranes, leading to cell lysis (Puértolas et
al., 2010). Although PEF processing is effective against most microorganisms, yeasts tend to
be more sensitive than bacteria (Marselles-Fontanet et al., 2009). PEF has been investigated
as a means to reduce microbial contamination in wines (Santos et al., 2012). Puértolas et al.
(2009a,b) reported that PEF treatment reduced populations of B. bruxellensis by 99.9% in both
grape must and wine. Among yeast, B. bruxellensis in must and S. bayanus in wine were the
most sensitive microorganisms, and D. anomala was the most PEF resistant independently of
the medium. The wine obtained from PEF-treated grapes was similar to the control wine from a
sensory point of view (Puértolas et al., 2010).

5.8 Low Electric Current (LEC)
Low electric current (LEC) is a treatment that involves the application of direct current
voltage pulses for very short periods of time, in the range between microseconds to
milliseconds, through a material placed between two electrodes. This voltage results in
an electric field, the intensity of which depends on the gap between the electrodes and the
voltage delivered (Puértolas et al., 2012). The possibility of applying low-intensity electricity
has been studied because of its effects on viable microflora and related microbial interactions
(Bawcom et al., 1995; Rajnicek et al., 1994; Shi et al., 1993). In fact, the application of
external electric fields to biological cells causes alteration in the membrane structure, leading
to pore formation. Under mild pulsation conditions, membrane pore formation is reversible,
whereas more drastic conditions lead to the irreversibility of the phenomenon that eventually
results in cell death (Weaver and Chizmadzhev, 1996). Current is generally applied to the
product at less than 200 mA over the period of several days to several months (Lustrato et
al., 2010; Palaniappan et al., 1992). Microbial inactivation is caused by electrical breakdown
in the membrane’s lipid bilayer (Lustrato et al., 2003). Increasing this current resulted in

298

Chapter 9

a direct relationship with reduced membrane integrity and metabolic activity (Lustrato
et al., 2003; Ranalli et al., 2002). Lustrato et al. (2010) applied LEC to contaminated red
wine and concluded that a 200 mA treatment over a 60-day interval reduced B. bruxellensis
populations by over six logs. The effects of LEC in controlling yeast spoilage were found to
be comparable with those of adding SO2. Lustrato et al. (2006) reported that wine fermented
using LEC was not organoleptically different from wine fermented using SO2. In contrast,
Nakanishi et al. (1997) observed that wine fermented using a 100 mA treatment had overall
greater final concentrations of higher alcohols, esters, some organic acids, and acetaldehyde.

6 Reduction of 4-Ethylphenol and 4-Ethylguaiacol Using Fining Agents
6.1 Classic Enological Products: Bentonite, Activated Carbon, and PVPP
Fining agents have to be removed from wine as they are not additives but technological
adjuvants. Most fining agents react within seconds and the contact time between the
fining agent and the wine should be as short as possible. Activated carbon and PVPP
can be filtered out immediately or a few hours after fining. At the opposite, formation of
flocculates requires a few days when proteins are used (depending on wine temperature) and
they require a week or two to settle. If the electrical charge is opposite of the particles in
suspension, neutralization and adsorption may occur. In most cases, the fining agent adsorbs
the suspended material and exerts some clarifying action by virtue of formation of particles
of high density, thus increasing filterability (Marchal and Jeandet, 2009). Some enological
products, such as bentonite, PVVP, and activated carbon, used at many years in the wine
industry, could remove partially the “Brett character” from wine (Table 9.2).

6.2 Yeast Cell Walls
Yeast cell walls, yeast hulls, and lees have been used in wine as biosorbents of undesirable
molecules. Sites for the interaction between different molecules and yeast are located on
the yeast wall. Yeast walls may bind undesirable compounds present in must that are toxic
for cells and they might provoke a stuck fermentation (medium-chain saturated fatty acids)
(Lafon-Lafourcade et al., 1984).
The yeast cell wall is composed of a three-dimensional internal skeletal layer of 1,3-β-glucan
and 1,6-β-glucan (30%–40% of wall mass) stabilized by hydrogen bonds. Other important
components of the yeast cell wall are the mannoproteins (30%–40% of wall mass), which
are the most highly exposed cell-wall molecules, and these may therefore form sorption sites
(Pradelles et al., 2008). 4-Ethylguaiacol and 4-ethylphenol show a fast sorption process,
indicating that they become fixed to the functional groups of the molecules that cover the
surface of the yeast walls (Nieto-Rojo et al., 2014). These authors showed, in synthetic wine,
that the sorption ability of yeast cell walls for 4-EG is greater and with a faster kinetics than

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

299

Table 9.2: Reduction of ethylphenols by activated carbon, PVPP, and yeast cell walls.
Enological Dosage
Product
(g/hL)

Matrix

Before Treatment After Treatment (µg/L, %) Analysis
4-EP
4-EG
4-EP
4-EG
Methods

Activated
carbon

20

Red wine 539

46

442 (18%)

41 (11%)

Activated
carbon

80

Red wine 1500

300

58%

56%

Activated
carbon

20

White
wine

250

1803 (27%)

185 (26%)

PVPP

80

Red wine 539

46

481 (11%)

—

PVPP

50

Red wine 1500

300

4.4%

—

Yeast cell
walls

500

Synthetic —
wine

—

21.7 (%)

47.8 (%)

Yeast cell
walls

500

Synthetic 1000
wine

1000

920 (8%)

956 (4.4%)

2470

Authors

n-Pentane,
GC/MS-SIM

Lisanti
et al.
(2008)
n-Pentane/
Milheiro
diethyl ether, et al.
GC/MS-SIM (2016)
n-Pentane,
Lisanti
GC/MS-SIM et al.
(2008)
n-Pentane,
Lisanti
GC/MS-SIM et al.
(2008)
SPME, GC/
Milheiro
MS-SIM
et al.
(2016)
SPE, GC/MS NietoRojo et al.
(2014)
SPE, GC/MS JiménezMoreno
and AncínAzpilicueta
(2009)

PVPP, Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone.

for 4-EP; however, the bonds are weaker than in the case of 4-EP. The capacity of yeast cell
wall on reduction or mitigation of 4-EP and 4-EG can be observed in Table 9.2.

6.3 Cellulose Acetate
The complex carbohydrate cellulose, being the basic structural component of the plant cell
wall, is the most abundant polymer in nature. In the primary structure, glucose units are
attached together by β-1,4 linkages forming a long chain (microfibril). These chains are able
to form intramolecular hydrogen bonds together, producing a cellulose fiber with unique
properties in terms of mechanical strength and chemical stability, and also able to form a
large number of hydrogen bonds on its surface, along with other molecules. The substitution
of acetyl, propyl, and butyl groups for OH cellulose groups leads to materials, such as
cellulose acetate (CA; CAS 9004-35-7), cellulose acetate propionate (CAP; CAS 9004-391), cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB; CAS 9004-36-8), and cellulose propionate (CP; CAS
9004-48-2). The presence of acetyl, propyl, and butyl groups leads to cellulose derivatives
that can be effectively dissolved by solvents, such as acetone (Allen and Bevington,

300

Chapter 9

1989). The ability of cellulose acetate, cellulose acetate propionate (CAP), cellulose
acetate butyrate (CAB), and cellulose propionate (CP) fibers to reduce 4-ethylphenol and
4-ethylguaiacol was tested by Larcher et al. (2012). CAP and CP performed best in a
preliminary comparative test. CAP effectiveness was studied in relation to the reduction in
volatile phenols with doses of up to 20 g/L and wine contact times of up to 60 min. Using
4 g/L, reduction of both phenols was, on average, 31%–32% in defective red wines. Wine
treatment affected neither color nor total proanthocyanidins and catechins, and wines were
judged to be better than the corresponding spoiled controls. CAP fiber can be regenerated
by washing with ethanol or aqueous solution (pH 12), without notable changes in depletion
efficiency. The technological characteristics of CAP and, to a lesser extent, CP offer
interesting prospects for producing filtration beds, pads, and membranes for the treatment of
wines and beverages affected by “Brett character”.

6.4 Polyaniline-Based Materials (PANI-EB and PANI-ES)
One group of compounds with potential applications in several fields, including the
removal of unwanted substances from food and beverages, is the polyaniline (PANI)-based
materials. PANI has been used in the development of transistors, switches, electrochemical
actuators, and lightning protection (Marican et al., 2014). The polyaniline-based polymers
exist in several forms, the most stable of which are the emaraldine states (i.e., emeraldine
salt, ES and emeraldine base, EB). They have been synthesized in high yields in aqueous
medium, are stable at high temperatures and pH, and are not metabolized by common
microorganisms (Ashley et al., 2011). The reason is possibly based on the fact that
PANI has often been regarded with caution because its reaction intermediates (aniline,
dimers, and oligomers) are aromatic amines that can be physiologically active or even
harmful (Yslas et al., 2012). PANI is relatively inexpensive, easy to synthesize, has good
environmental stability, and shows interesting redox properties associated with the nitrogen
chain. The ability of polyaniline-based materials (PANI-EB and PANI-ES) was tested
as a potential fining agent for the removal of 4-EG in wine. First, a screening study was
developed in order to determine the binding capacity of 4-EG by PANI materials in 12%
ethanol solution. Then, the capturing ability of PANI against 4-EG was evaluated with a
solution containing gallic acid (GA), 4-methyl-catechol (4-MC), in which the concentration
of the phenolic compounds were maintained as in the real wine. The results obtained by
Yslas et al. (2012) showed that the retention percentage varied from 0% to 100% (4-EG),
13.81% to 72.32% (GA), and 0% to 17.39% (4-MC), depending on the interaction time and
amount of the PANI used. Finally, the capturing capacity of PANI-EB and PANI-ES against
4-EG was evaluated in a real wine sample containing originally 3.10 mg/L of 4-EG and
2.55 g/L of other total phenolic compounds. The analysis performed indicated that PANIEB is more effective in removing 4-EG than PANI-ES, with retention percentages varying
between 36% and 50%.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

301

6.5 Cyclodextrins
Cyclodextrins (CDs) are carbohydrates composed of α-1,4-linked glucopyranose, also called
glucose units, where the glucopyranose molecules are arranged to form a ring that looks like a
bottomless bucket (Botelho et al., 2011). The outer side of this ring has a molecular structure
that gives it solubility in water (as other simple carbohydrates), while the inside repels water,
favoring molecules that are insoluble in water. These molecules, dissolved or dispersed in
water, have a preference for being in the cavity rather than in water (Duchene et al., 2003).
When the host molecules are in the cavity, it is not covalent forces that prevent them from
leaving, but atomic (Van der Waals), thermodynamic (hydrogen bonding), and solvent
(hydrophobic) forces in the hydrophobic environment of the CD cavity (Astray et al.,
2009). These links can be destroyed easily by heating, pH changing, and other factors. A
complex can be formed if a balance exists between the relative concentrations of the CD
and the potential guest chemical. The rate at which the associated complex is formed is
determined by the accessibility of the guest molecule to the CD cavity and the magnitude
of the thermodynamic driving force. Hydrophobic guest molecule is removed from the
aqueous environment, while water molecules previously associated in the CD cavity return
into aqueous environment; that’s why this binding is energetically favorable (Singh et al.,
2002).
According to these preliminary results obtained by Botelho et al. (2011), the concentration of
11.52 g/L of β-CD (ratio of 2:1) was enough to remove the off-odors caused by 4-ethylphenol
or 4-ethylphenol + 4-ethylguaiacol in a red wine by sensorial analysis. Furthermore,
the addition of β-CD to red wine increased significantly the color intensity and the total
polyphenols index.

7 Prevention of Biogenic Amines Formation During Winemaking
As mentioned earlier, BA origin and levels in wines is a multifactorial problem, starting
from agricultural practices to the winemaking technology (Ancín-Azpilicueta et al., 2008;
Del Prete et al., 2009). In order to reduce the presence of BA in vine-based products, the
International Organization of Vine and Wine (OIV) published the “OIV Code of Good
Vitivinicultural Practices.” According the OIV Guide (2011), the actions in vineyards and
cellars favoring the presence of BA in wines are: soil, nitrogenous fertilization, poor state of
health of the grapes combined with mold, a high must pH, and development of certain yeasts
during alcoholic fermentation. Also the levels of BA in wines are significantly increased by
LAB during MLF (Ancín-Azpilicueta et al., 2008). According to Callejón et al. (2014), there
are three main ways of diminishing the BA formation: preventing the growth of spoilage
bacteria, reducing the concentration of amino acid precursors, and inoculating starter cultures
without amino acid decarboxylases.

302

Chapter 9

7.1 Methods for Reduction of Formed BA in Wines
Fining of finished wines with bentonite, either calcium, sodium-calcium, or sodium form
are able to reduce the content of BA in wines (Binner et al., 2013; Grossmann et al., 2007;
Kallay and Body-Szalkai, 1996; Mannino et al., 2006). The efficiency of removal was
dependent on the bentonite dose used with a reduction of 40% at 100 g/hL of bentonite for a
BA content of 25 mg/L (Mannino et al., 2006), nevertheless high bentonite doses can impact
negatively on the sensorial and chromatic characteristics of wine. To overcome this problem,
the previous addition of ellagic tannins to wine can decrease the amount of bentonite needed
(reduction to 20 g/hL obtaining the same results of 60 g/hL of bentonite only) (Mannino et
al., 2006). Nevertheless, when fining is applied to the must, the decrease of BA in the final
wine is higher (80% decrease for must treatment compared to 40% obtained for the wine
treatment (Binner et al., 2013; Grossmann et al. 2007), and besides the decrease observed
for bentonite, other fining agents, such as potassium caseinate, gelatin, and activated carbons
also have an effect on the BA levels in the final wine (Grossmann et al., 2007). Recently
the use of commercial zirconium phosphate in the sodium form showed strong adsorbent
activity for histamine and putrescine (Amghouz et al., 2014). The use of material with high
selectivity for the BA can be a good technology to reduce the BA levels in wines after the
fermentation.

7.2 Methods for Degrading Formed BAs
Another alternative for the reduction of BA levels in wines is its degradation by the use of
microorganisms or enzyme preparations. Garcia-Ruiz et al. (2011) studied the ability of
diverse LAB strains for their ability to degrade hitamine, tyramine, and putrescine. They
observed that 25% of the strains were able to degrade histamine and 18% were able to
degrade tyramine and putrescine. Two L. plantarum biotypes of twenty-six strains were
able to synergistically reduce BA levels with higher efficiency (Capozzi et al., 2012). This
reduction of BA by bacteria was attributed to the presence of amine oxidase activity. The
use of enzyme preparation presenting amine oxidase activity instead of the cells has been
also studied (Callejón et al., 2014; Sekiguchi et al., 2004), although their efficiency has been
limited by the low wine pH and also the complex wine matrix.

8 Ethyl Carbamate Mitigation
The presence of ethyl carbamate in wines is mainly related to the formation of urea by yeasts,
where its excretion and utilization during alcoholic fermentation is governed mainly by the
yeast strain used and environmental conditions, that after reaction with ethanol results in this
potential toxic product (Ough et al., 1988b). So, important parameters for the postfermentative
formation of ethyl carbamate are the concentration of ethanol, urea, citrulline, temperature,
and time of storage (Hasnip et al., 2004). A less important parameter is the levels of carbamyl

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

303

phosphate produced by yeasts, and in addition, daylight exposure doesn’t seem to be related
with ethyl carbamate formation (Tegmo-Larsson and Spittler, 1990). At present, only
preventive treatments have been found to be efficient for the reduction of ethyl carbamate
levels in wines. Principal among these has been a series of preventative actions drawn from
scientific research and produced jointly by U.C. Davis, the Wine Institute, and the US Food
and Drug Administration (Butzke and Bisson, 1997). These actions covering best practices
in viticulture, juice nutrient status, yeast strains and LAB, urease application, sur lie aging,
distillation, and shipment and storage have helped US wine growers and distillers to control
the formation of ethyl carbamate in their products. On the other hand, legislation authorizes
the use of an enological additive, the enzyme urease, in wines with high urea levels. The
urease used is isolated from L. fermentum. This enzyme has been effective on urea at doses of
50 mg/L in red wines and at doses of 25 mg/L in white wines (Bertrand, 1997).

9 Application of Fining Agents to Reduce OTA Concentration from Wine
According to the European Commission Regulation (EC) No. 123/2005 the maximum limit
for OTA in wine is 2 µg/kg [Commission Regulation (EC) No. 123/2005]. Therefore, it is
important to prevent and control their occurrence in wines. In general red wines comprise
greater OTA concentration than white, which is related with the vinification process of
red wines, namely with the maceration operation. With the purpose to remove this toxin,
several adsorvents (potassium caseinate, activated carbon, bentonite, egg albumin, gelatin,
and polyvinylpolypyrrolidone) have been described in the literature by several researchers,
such as Castellari et al. (2001), Kurtbay et al. (2008), Quintela et al. (2012a, 2012b), in
order to study the removal of OTA from contaminated wine. The application of the different
fining agents aims to assess their ability to firmly bind and immobilize the mycotoxin. The
outcomes obtained in the different studies showed that the efficiency in the removal of OTA
from the wine is influenced by several factors, such as the wine OTA concentration, the fining
agent applied, in addition to its type and dosage.

10 Final Remarks
Yeast and bacterial meeting the best enological characteristics and the optimization of fining
and technological treatments are the future steps to produce quality wines, promoting human
health and enjoyment, with benefits to the palatability of wines.

References
Abrunhosa, L., Inês, A., Rodrigues, A.I., Guimarães, A., Pereira, V.L., Parpot, P., Mendes-Faia, A., Venâncio,
A., 2014. Biodegradation of ochratoxin A by Pediococcus parvulus isolated from Douro wines. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 188 (1), 45–52.
Aguilar, C.N., Gutierrez-Sanchez, G., 2001. Review: sources, properties, applications and potential uses of tannin
acylhydrolase. Food Sci. Technol. Int. 7, 373–382.

304

Chapter 9

Allen, G., Bevington, J.C., 1989. Comprehensive Polymer Science: The Synthesis, Characterization, Reactions,
and Applications of Polymers. Pergamon Press, New York.
Amerine, M., Kunker, R.E., 1968. Microbiology of winemaking. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 22, 323–358.
Amghouz, Z., Ancn-Azpilicueta, C., Burusco, K.K., et al., 2014. Biogenic amines in wine: individual and
competitive adsorption ona modified zirconium phosphate. Micropor. Mesopor. Mat 197, 130–139.
Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., González-Marco, A., Jiménez-Moreno, N., 2008. Current knowledge about the presence of
amines in wine. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 48, 257–275.
Arena, M.E., Lisi, M.S., Manca de Nadra, M.C., Alberto, M.R., 2013. Wine composition plays an important role
in the control of carcinogenic precursor formation by Lactobacillus hilgardii X1B. J. Sci. Food Agric. 93,
142–148.
Arena, M., Manca de Nadra, M., 2001. Biogenic amine production by Lactobacillus. J. Appl. Microbiol. 90,
158–162.
Arena, M., Manca de Nadra, M., Munoz, R., 2002. The arginine deiminase pathway in the wine lactic acid
bacterium Lactobacillus hilgardii X1B: structural and functional study of the arcABC genes. Gene 301,
61–66.
Ashley, P.C., Joseph, M.J., Mohanan, P.V., 2011. Activity of diastase α-amylase immobilized on polyanilines
(PANIs). Food Chem. 127, 1808–1813.
Astray, G., Gonzalez-Barreiro, C., Mejuto, J.C., Rial-Otero, R., Simal-Gandara, J., 2009. A review on the use of
cyclodextrins in food. Food Hydrocoll. 23 (7), 1631–1640.
Bakker, J., Timberlake, C.F., 1997. Isolation, identification, and characterization of new color-stable anthocyanins
occurring in some red wines. J. Agric. Food Chem. 45, 35–43.
Bartowsky, E.J., 2009. Bacterial spoilage of wine and approaches to minimize it. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 48 (2),
149–156.
Bartowsky, E.J., Henschke, P.A., 2008. Acetic acid bacteria spoilage of bottled red wine: a review. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 125 (1), 60–70.
Bawcom, D.W., Thompson, L.D., Miller, M.F., Ramsey, C.B., 1995. Reduction of microorganisms of beef surfaces
utilizing electricity. J. Food Prot. 58, 35–38.
Bertrand, A., 1997. Le Carbamate D’ethyle dans les Vins, Observations sur Son Origine, Possibilit´e d’en
Diminuer la Teneur. Rapport OIV. Décembre.
Binner, A., Smit, I., Loehnertz, O., Linsenmeier, A., Grossmann, M., Treutter, D., 2013. Influence of enological
measures on biogenicamines in wine. Mitteilungen Klosterneuburg 63, 139–158.
Boehm, T., Mehta, D., 1938. Ester der Pyrokohlensaure. Berichte 17, 1797.
Bony, M., Bidart, F., Camarasa, C., Ansanay, V., Dulau, L., Barre, P., Dequin, S., 1997. Metabolic analysis of S.
cerevisiae strains engineered for malolactic fermentation. FEBS Lett. 410, 452–456.
Botelho, G., Valiau, C., Moreira da Silva, A., 2011. Effect of cyclodextrins on off-odors removal of red wine: an
innovative aproach. Ciência Téc. Vitic 26 (2), 63–68.
Boulton, R.B., Singleton, V.L., Bisson, L.F., Kunkee, R.E. (Eds.), 1996. Principles and Practices of Winemaking.
first ed. Chapman & Hall, New York, USA.
Bover-Cid, S., Iquierdo-Pulido, M., Mariné-Font, A., Vidal-Carou, M., 2006. Biogenic mono-, di- and polyamine
contents in Spanish wines and influence of a limited irrigation. Food Chem. 96, 43–47.
Buckenhüskes, H.J., 1993. Selection criteria for lactic acid bacteria to be used as starter cultures for various food
commodities. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 12, 253–272.
Butzke, C.E., Bisson, L.F., 1997. Ethyl Carbamate Preventative Action Manual, US Food and
Drug Administration, Washington, DC. Available from: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/
FoodborneIllnessContaminants/UCM119802.pdf.
Callejón, S., Sendra, R., Ferrer, S., Pardo, I., 2014. Identification of a novel enzymatic activity from lactic acid
bacteria able to degrade biogenic amines in wine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98 (1), 185–198.
Campolongo, S., Siegumfeldt, H., Aabo, T., Cocolin, L., Arneborg, N., 2014. The effects of extracellular pH and
hydroxycinnamic acids influence the intracellular pH of Brettanomyces bruxellensis DSM 7001. LWT—Food
Sci. Technol. 59, 1088–1092.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

305

Campos, F.M., Couto, J.A., Hogg, T.A., 2003. Influence of phenolic acids on growth and inactivation of
Oenococcus oeni and Lactobacillus hilgardii. J. Appl. Microbiol. 94, 167–174.
Capozzi, C., Russ, P., Ladero, V., Fernández, M., Fiocco, D., Alvarez, M., Grieco, F., Spano, G., 2012. Biogenic
amines degradation by Lactobacillus plantarum: toward a potential application in wine. Front. Microbiol.
Food Microbiol. 3 (122), 1–6.
Carlton, W.K., Gump, B., Fugelsang, K., Hasson, A.S., 2007. Monitoring acetaldehyde concentrations during
micro-oxygenation of red wine by headspace solid-phase microextraction with on-fiber derivatization. J.
Agric. Food Chem. 55, 5620–5625.
Caronel, M.B., Marin, S., Cano, G., Ramos, A.J., Sanchis, V., 2011. Ochratoxin A on Spanish retail ground rosted
coffee: occurrence and assessment of the expousure in Catalonia. Food Control 22 (2-3), 414–419.
Caruso, M., Fiore, C., Contursi, M., Salzano, G., Paparella, A., Romano, P., 2002. Formation of biogenic amines
as criteria for selection of wine yeasts. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 18, 159–163.
Casal, M., Cardoso, H., Leão, C., 1996. Mechanisms regulating the transport of acetic acid in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Microbiology 142, 1385–1390.
Casal, M., Cardoso, H., Leão, C., 1998. Effects of ethanol and other alkanols on transport of acetic acid in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 665–668.
Casal, M., Paiva, S., Andrade, R.P., Gancedo, C., Leão, C., 1999. The lactate-proton symport of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is encoded by JEN1. J. Bacteriol. 181, 2620–2623.
Castellari, M., Versari, A., Fabiani, A., Parpinello, G.P., Galassi, S., 2001. Removal of ochratoxin A in red wines
by means of adsorption treatments with commercial fining agents. J. Agr. Food. Chem. 49, 3917–3921.
Cavin, J.F., Andioc, V., Etievant, P., Diviès, C., 1993. Ability to wine lactic acid bacteria to metabolize phenol
carboxylic acids. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 44, 76–80.
Chatonnet, P., Boidron, J., Dubourdieu, D., 1993. Infuence des conditions d’élevage etde sulfitage des vins rouges
en barriques sur le teneur en ácide acétique et ethylphenols. J. Int. Sci. Vigne Vin 27, 277–298.
Chatonnet, P., Boidron, J., Pons, M., 1990. Elevage des vins rouges en fûts de chêne: évolution de certains
composés volatils et de leur impact arômatique. Sci. Aliment. 10, 587–656.
Chatonnet, P., Coralie, V., Dubourdieu, D., 1997. Influence of polyphenolic components of red wines on the
microbial synthesis of volatile phenols. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 48, 443–448.
Chatonnet, P., Dubordieu, D., Boidron, J., 1995. The influence of Brettanomyces/Dekkera sp. yeasts and lactic acid
bacteria on the ethylphenol content of red wines. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 46, 463–468.
Chatonnet, P., Dubourdieu, D., Boidron, J.N., Pons, M., 1992. The origin of ethylphenols in wine. J. Sci. Food
Agric. 60, 165–178.
Ciani, M., Maccarelli, F., 1998. Oenological properties of non-Saccharomyces yeasts associated with winemaking. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 14, 199–203.
Claisse, O., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2001. Detection de bactéries lactiques produisant du 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde
(precurseur d’acroleine) à partir du glycerol par tests moléculaires. Lait 81, 173–181.
Cliff, M.A., Pickering, G.J., 2006. Determination of odor detection thresholds for acetic acid and ethyl acetate in
ice wine. J. Wine Res. 17 (1), 45–52.
Cocolin, L., Rantsiou, K., Iacumin, L., Zironi, R., Comi, G., 2004. Molecular detection and identifcation of
Brettanomyces/Dekkera bruxellensis and Brettanomyces/Dekkeraanomalus in spoiled wines. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 70 (3), 1347–1355.
Coetzee, C., Brand, J., Jacobson, D., Du Toit, W.J., 2016. Sensory effect of acetaldehyde on the perception of
3-mercaptohexan-1-ol and 3-isobutyl-2-methoxypyrazine. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 22 (2), 197–204.
Costa, A., Barata, A., Malfeito-Ferreira, M., Loureiro, V., 2008. Evaluation of the inhibitory effect of dimethyl
dicarbonate (DMDC) against wine microorganisms. Food Microbiol. 25, 422–427.
Costello, P.J., Henschke, P.A., 2002. Mousy off-flavour of wine: precursors and biosynthesis of the causative Nheterocycles 2-ethyltetrahydropyridine, 2-acetyltetrahydropyridine, and 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline by Lactobacillus
hilgardii DSM 20176. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50, 7079–7087.
Cotter, P., Hill, C., 2003. Surviving the acid test: responses of gram-positive bacteria to low pH. Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 67, 429–453.

306

Chapter 9

Couto, J.A., Barbosa, A., Hogg, T., 2005. A simple cultural method for the presumptive detection of the yeasts
Brettanomyces/Dekkera in wines. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 41, 505–510.
Couto, J.A., Campos, F., Figueiredo, R., Hogg, T., 2006. Ability of lactic acid bacteria to produce volatile phenols.
Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 57, 166–171.
Crowell, E.A., Guymon, J.F., 1975. Wine constituents arising from sorbic acid addition, and identification of
2-ethoxyhexa-3,5-diene as source of geranium-like off-odor. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 26, 97–102.
Dalié, D.K.D., Deschamps, A.M., Richard-Forget, F., 2010. Lactic acid bacteria: potential for control of mold
growth and mycotoxins: a review. Food Control 21, 370–380.
De las Rivas, B., Marcobal, A., Munoz, R., 2005. Improved multiplex-PCR method for the simultaneous detection
of food bacteria producing biogenic amines. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 244, 367–372.
Del Prete, V., Costantini, A., Cecchini, F., Morassut, M., Garcia-Moruno, E., 2009. Occurrence of biogenic amines
in wine: the role of grapes. Food Chem. 112, 474–481.
Delfini, C., Costa, A., 1993. Effects of the grape must lees and insoluble materials on the alcoholic fermentation
rate and on the production of acetic acid, pyruvic acid and acetaldehyde. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 44, 86–92.
Delfini, C., Gaia, P., Schellino, R., Strano, M., Pagliara, A., Ambro, S., 2002. Fermentability of grape must after
inhibition with dimethyl dicarbonate (DMDC). J. Agric. Food Chem. 50, 5605–5611.
Divol, B., Tonon, T., Morichon, S., Gindreau, E., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2003. Molecular characterization of
Oenococcus oeni genes encoding proteins involved in arginine transport. J Appl. Microbiol. 94, 738–746.
Doneche, B., 1993. Botrytized wines. In: Fleet, G.H. (Ed.), Wine Microbiology and Biotechnology. Harwood
Academic Publishers, Chur, Switzerland, pp. 327–353.
dos Santos, M.M., Gombert, A.K., Christensen, B., Olsson, L., Nielsen, J., 2003. Identification of in vivo enzyme
activities in the cometabolism of glucose and acetate by Saccharomyces cerevisiae by using 13C-labeled
substrates. Eukaryot. Cell 2, 599–608.
Du Toit, W.J., Lambrechts, M.G., 2002. The enumeration and identification of acetic acid bacteria from South
African red wine fermentations. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 74, 57–64.
Du Toit, M., Pretorius, I.S., 2000. Microbial spoilage and preservation of wine: using weapons from nature’s own
arsenal: a review. S. Afr. J. Enol. Viticult. 21 (Special Issue), 74–96.
Duchene, D., Bochot, A., Yu, S.-C., Pepin, C., Seiller, M., 2003. Cyclodextrins and emulsions. Int. J. Pharma. 266
(1-2), 85–90.
Eglinton, J.M., Henschke, P.A., 1999. Restarting incomplete fermentations: the effect of high concentrations of
acetic acid. Aust. J. Grape Wine. Res. 52, 71–78.
Erasmus, D.J., Cliff, M., van Vuuren, H.J.J., 2004. Impact of yeast strain on the production of acetic acid, glycerol,
and the sensory attributes of ice wine. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 55, 371–378.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), 2004. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition,
and Allergies on a request from the commission relating to the evaluation of allergenic foods for labelling
purposes. Parma, Italy. Available from: http://www.efsa.europa.eu/de/efsajournal/doc/32.pdf.
European Union (EU), 2011. Commission regulation (EU) 53/2011 of January 21, 2011. Off. J. Eur. Union 2011,
L19/1−L19/6.
VA Filtration, 2015. Eliminate volatile personality from your wine. Available from: http://vafiltration.com/blog/
eliminate-volatile-personality-from-your-wine/.
Flamini, R., 2014. Recent applications of mass spectrometry in the study of grape and wine polyphenols: review
article. ISRN Spectroscopy. Article ID 813563, 45 p.
Fleet, G.H., 2001. Wine. In: Doyle, M.P., Beuchat, L.R., Montville, T.J. (Eds.), Food Microbiology Fundamentals
and Frontiers. second ed. ASM Press, Washington, DC, pp. 747–772.
Fleet, G.H., Heard, G.M., 1993. Yeasts-growth during fermentation. In: Fleet, G.H. (Ed.), Wine Microbiology and
Biotechnology. Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur, Switerzland, pp. 27–54.
Fras, P., Campos, F.M., Hogg, T., Couto, J.A., 2014. Production of volatile phenols by Lactobacillus plantarum in
wine conditions. Biotechnol. Lett. 36, 281–285.
Friavad, J.C., Smedsgaad, J., Samson, R.A., Larsen, T.O., Thrane, U., 2007. Fumonisin B2 production by
Aspergillus niger. J. Agr. Food Chem. 55, 9727–9732.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

307

Fung, F., Clark, R.F., 2004. Health effects of mycotoxins: a toxicological overview. J. Toxicol. Clin. Toxicol. 42
(2), 217–234.
García-Cela, E., Ramos, A.J., Sanchis, V., Marin, S., 2012. Emerging risk management metrics in food safety:
FSO, PO—how do they apply to the mycotoxin hazard? Food Control 25, 797–808.
Garcia-Ruiz, A., Gonzalez-Rompinelli, E.M., Bartolome, B., Moreno-Arribas, M.V., 2011. Potential of wineassociated lactic acid bacteria to degrade biogenic amines. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 148, 115–120.
Garde-Cerdán, T., Arias-Gil, M., Marsellés-Fontanet, A.R., Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., Martín Belloso, O., 2007.
Effects of thermal and nonthermal processing treatment on fatty acids and free amino acids of grape juice.
Food Control 18, 473–479.
Gil-Serna, J., Vazquez, C., Sardiñas, N., Gonzàlez-Jaén, M.T., Patiño, B., 2011. Revision of ochratoxin A
production capacity by the main species of Aspergillus section Circumdati, Apergillus steynii revealed as the
main risk of OTA contamination. Food Control 22 (2), 343–345.
Gómez-Rivas, L., Escudero-Abarca, B.I., Aguilar-Uscanga, M.G., Hayward-Jones, P.M., Mendoza, P., Ramirez,
M., 2004. Selective antimicrobial action of chitosan against spoilage yeasts in mixed culture fermentations. J.
Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 31, 16–22.
González-Marco, A., Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., 2006. Influence of lees contact on evolution of amines in chardonnay
wine. J. Food Sci. 71, C544–C548.
Grando, M.S., Versini, G., Nicolini, G., Mattivi, F., 1993. Selective use of wine yeast strains having different
volatile phenols production. Vitis 32, 43–50.
Grbin, P.R., Costello, P.J., Herderich, M., Markides, A.J., Henschke, P.A., Lee, T.H., 1996. Developments in the
sensory, chemical, and microbiological basis of mousey taint. In: Stockley, C.S., Sas, A.N., Johnstone, R.S.,
Lee, T.H. (Eds.), In: Proceedings of the Ninth Australian Wine Industry Technical Conference. Adelaide,
Australia, pp. 57–61.
Grbin, P.R., Henschke, P.A., 2000. Mousy off-flavour production in grape juice and wine by Dekkera and
Brettanomyces yeasts. Aust. J. Grape Wine Res. 6, 255–262.
Grossmann, M., Smit, I., Loehnertz, O., Ansorge, A., 2007. Biogenic amines and grapes: effect of microbes
and fining agents. In: Proceedings of International Symposium of Microbiology and Food Safety of Wine.
Vilafranca, Spain: November 20–21, 2007.
Guerrini, S., Bastianini, A., Granchi, L., Vincenzini, M., 2002. Effect of oleic acid on Oenococcus oeni strains and
malolactic fermentation in wine. Curr. Microbiol. 44 (1), 5–9.
Guerzoni, M.E., Gardini, F., Duan, J., 1990. Interactions between inhibition factors on microbial stability of fruitbased systems. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 10, 1–18.
Gunata, Z., Bitteur, S., Baumes, R., Sapis, J.C., Bayonove, C., 1990. Activites glycosidases en vinification.
Perspectives d’exploitation des precurseurs d’arome du raisin, de nature glycosidique. Rev. Franc. Oenol. 30
(122), 37–41.
Hasnip, S., Caputi, A., Crews, C., Brereton, P., 2004. Effects of storage time and temperature on the concentration
of ethyl carbamate and its precursors in wine. Food Addit. Contam. 21, 1155–1161.
Hathout, A.S., Aly, S.E., 2014. Biological detoxification of mycotoxins: a review. Ann. Microbiol. 64 (3),
905–919.
Henríquez-Aedo, K., Durán, D., Garcia, A., Martha, B., Hengst, M.B., Aranda, M., 2016. Identification of biogenic
amines-producing lactic acid bacteria isolated from spontaneous malolactic fermentation of Chilean red
wines. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 68, 183–189.
Hernández, T., Estrella, I., Pérez-Gordo, M., Alegría, E.-G., Tenorio, C., Ruiz-Larrrea, F., 2007. Contribution
of Oenococcus oeni and Lactobacillus plantarum to the nonanthocyanin phenolic composition of red wine
during malolactic fermentation. J. Agr. Food Chem. 55, 5260–5266.
Howell, K.S., Klein, M., Swiegers, J.H., Hayasaka, Y., Elsey, G.M., Fleet, G.H., Høj, P.B., Pretorius, I.S., de
Barros Lopes, M.A., 2005. Genetic determinants of volatile-thiol release by Saccharomyces cerevisiae during
wine fermentation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 5420–5426.
Husnik, J.I., Delaquis, P.J., Cliff, M.A., van Vuuren, H.J.J., 2007. Functional analyses of the malolactic wine yeast
ml01. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 58, 42–52.

308

Chapter 9

Inês, A.F.H., 2007. Abordagem polifásica na caracterização e selecção de bactérias do ácido láctico de vinhos da
Região Demarcada do Douro. 198 p. PhD Thesis, Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro.
Jiménez-Moreno, N., Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., 2009. Sorption of volatile phenols by yeast cell walls. Int. J. Wine
Res. 1, 11–18.
Joyeux, A., Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1984a. Evolution of acetic acid bacteria during
fermentation and storage of wine. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 48, 153–156.
Joyeux, A., Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1984b. Metabolism of acetic acid bacteria in grape must:
consequences on alcoholic and malolactic fermentation. Sci. Aliments 4, 247–255.
Kalac, P., Krizec, M., 2003. A review of biogenic amines and polyamines in beer. J. Inst. Brew 109, 123–128.
Kallay, M., Body-Szalkai, M., 1996. Ammine biogene nei vini ungheresi. Rivista díViticoltura e di Enologia 3,
29–38.
Kántor, A., Kačániová, M., 2015. Isolation and identification of spoilage yeasts in wine samples by MALDI-TOF
MS biotyper. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 48 (1), 156–161.
Kong, M., Chen, X.G., Xing, K., Park, H.J., 2010. Antimicrobial properties of chitosan and mode of action: a state
of the art review. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 144, 51–63.
Kruckeber, A.L., Dickinson, J.R., 2004. Carbon metabolism. In: Dickinson, J.R., Schweizer, M. (Eds.), The
Metabolism and Molecular Physiology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. CRC Press, New York, pp 42–76.
Kurtbay, H.M., Bekçi, Z., Merdivan, M., Yurdakoç, K., 2008. Reduction of ochratoxin A levels in red wine by
bentonite, modified bentonites, and chitosan. J. Agr. Food Chem. 56, 2541–2545.
Kushnereva, E.V., 2015. Formation of biogenic amines in wine production. Appl. Biochem. Microbiol 51,
108–112.
Lafon-Lafourcade, S., Genedc, C., Ribéreau-Gayon, P., 1984. Inhibition of alcoholic fermentation of grape
must by fatty acids produced by yeasts and their elimination by yeast ghosts. Appl. Envion. Microb. 47 (6),
1246–1249.
Landete, J.M., Ferrer, S., Pardo, I., 2005. Which lactic acid bacteria are responsible for histamine production in
wine? J. Appl. Microbiol. 99, 580–586.
Landete, J.M., Ferrer, S., Pardo, I., 2007. Biogenic amine production by lactic acid bacteria acetic bacteria and
yeast isolated from wine. Food Control 18, 1569–1574.
Larcher, R., Puecher, C., Rohregger, S., Malacarne, M., Nicolini, G., 2012. 4-Ethylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol
depletion in wine using esterified cellulose. Food Chem. 132, 2126–2130.
Lasik, M., 2013. The application of malolactic fermentation process to create good quality grape wine produced in
cool-climate countries: a review. Eur. Food Technol. 237, 843–850.
Leitão, M., Teixeira, H., Barreto Crespo, M., San Romao, M., 2000. Biogenic amines occurrence in wine: amino
acid decarboxylase and proteolytic activities expression by Oenococcus oeni. J. Agric. Food Chem. 48,
2780–2784.
Leroy, F., Kerrebroeck, S.V., Vuyst, L., 2014. Metabolomics. In: Batt, C.A., Tortorello, M.L. (Eds.), Encyclopedia
of Food Microbiology. Elsevier, New York, pp. 780–787.
Lin, W., You, W. Feng, T., 2014. Review of Brettanomyces of grape wine and its inhibition methods. In: Xie,
L., Huang, D. (Eds.), Advanced Engineering, Technology: Proceedings of the 2014 Annual Congress on
Advanced Engineering and Technology (CAET 2014), Hong Kong, April 19–20, 2014. CRC Press, London.
Lino, C.M., Silva, L.J.G., Pena, A.S., 2004. Fumonisinas: presença em alimentos, implicações na saúde e aspectos
legislativos. Revista Portuguesa de Ciências Veterinárias 99 (552), 181–192.
Lisanti, M., Piombino, P., Gambuti, A., Genovese, A., Ludmilla, S., Moio, L., 2008. Analytical evaluation of
remedial treatments for red and white wines contaminated by volatile phenols. Bull. de l´OIV 81 (923–925),
45–55.
Liu, S., 2002. A review: malolactic fermentation in wine: beyond deacidification. J. Appl. Microbiol 92, 589–601.
Liu, J., Xu, W., Zhao, Q., Qiao, M., Zhang, H., Chen, G., 2007. Bacterial retention in lipopolysaccharide-coated
silica sand. Sep. Sci. Technol. 42, 1031–1047.
Llaudy, M.D., Canals, R., Gonzalez-Manzano, S., Canals, J.M., Santos-Buelga, C., Zamora, F., 2006. Influence of
MO treatment before oak aging on phenolic compounds composition, astringency, and color of red wine. J.
Agr. Food. Chem. 54, 4246–4252.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

309

Lonvaud-Funel, A., 1999. Lactic acid bacteria in the quality improvement and depreciation of wine. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek 76, 317–331.
Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2001. Biogenic amines in wines: role of lactic acid bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 199, 9–13.
Lonvaud-Funel, A., Renouf, V., 2005. Incidence microbiologicque de l’usage de barriques neuves et/ou de barrique
usagées. Rev. Fran. d’Oenol 211, 10–14.
Loureiro, V., Malfeito-Ferreira, M., 2003. Spoilage yeast in the wine industry. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 86 (1–2), 23–50.
Lustrato, G., Alfano, G., Belli, C., Grazia, L., Iorizzo, M., Maiuro, L., Massarella, F., Zanardini, E., 2003.
Controlling grape must fermentation in early wine-making phases: the role of electrochemical treatment. J.
Appl. Microbiol. 95, 1087–1095.
Lustrato, G., Alfano, G., Belli, C., Grazia, L., Iorizzo, M., Ranalli, G., 2006. Scaling-up in industrial winemaking
using low electric current as an alternative to sulphur dioxide addition. J. Appl. Microbiol. 101, 682–690.
Lustrato, G., Vigentini, I., De Leonardis, A., Alfano, G., Tirelli, A., 2010. Inactivation of wine spoilage yeasts
Dekkera bruxellensis using low electric current treatment. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109, 594–604.
Maicas, S., 2001. The use of alternative technologies to develop malolactic fermentation in wine. Appl. Microbiol.
Biol. 56, 35–39.
Manca de Nadra, M., Arena, M., Saguir, F., 2003. Nutritional requirements and amino acids utilization by lactic
acid bacteria from wine: a short review. J. Food Agric. Environ. 1, 76–79.
Mannino, M., Vassanelli, G., Triulzi, G., 2006. Trattamenti al vino per ridurre il contenuto inammine biogene e
loro quantificazione. Vigne Vini 1-2, 72–75.
Marchal, R., Jeandet, P., 2009. Use of enological additives for colloid and tartrate salt stabilization in white wine
and for improvement of sparkling wine foaming properties. In: Moreno-Arribas, M.V., Polo, C. (Eds.), Wine
Chemistry and Biochemistry. Springer-Verlag, New York, USA, Chapter 5.
Marcobal, A., de las Rivas, B., Moreno-Arribas, M.V., Muñoz, R., 2006a. Evidence for horizontal gene transfer as
origin of putrescine production in Oenococcus oeni RM83. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 7954–7958.
Marcobal, A., Martin-Alvarez, P., Polo, M., Munoz, R., MorenoArribas, M., 2006b. Formation of biogenic amines
throughout the industrial manufacture of red wine. J. Food Prot. 69, 397–404.
Marican, A., Carrasco-Sánchez, V., John, A., Laurie, V.F., Santos, L.S., 2014. The binding of 4-ethylguaiacol with
polyaniline-based materials in wines. Food Chem. 159, 486–492.
Marselles-Fontanet, A.R., Puig, A., Olmos, P., Minguez-Sanz, S., Martin-Belloso, O., 2009. Optimizing the
inactivation of grape juice spoilage organisms by pulse electric fields. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 130, 159–165.
Martín-Álvarez, P., Marcobal, A., Polo, C., Moreno-Arribas, M.V., 2006. Influence of technological practices on
biogenic amine contents in red wines. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 222, 420–424.
Martín-Belloso, O., Sobrino-López, A., 2011. Combination of pulsed electric fields with other preservation
techniques. Food Bioproc. Technol. l 4, 954–968.
Martineau, B., Henick-Kling, T., 1995. Performance and diacetyl production of commercial strains of malolactic
bacteria in wine. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 78, 526–536.
Martínez-Moreno, R., Morales, P., Gonzalez, R., Mas, A., Beltran, G., 2012. Biomass production and alcoholic
fermentation performance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a function of nitrogen source. FEMS Yeast Res. 12,
477–485.
Massot, A., Mietton-Peuchotm, M., Peuchotm, C., Milisic, V., 2008. Nanofiltration and reverse osmosis in
winemaking. Desalination 231, 283–289.
McCord, J., 2003. Application of toasted oak and micro-oxygenation to ageing of cabernet sauvignon wines.
Austral. NZ Grapegrower Winemaker 474, 43–53.
Meaden, P.G., Taylor, N.R., 1991. Cloning of a yeast gene which causes phenolic off-flavors in beer. J. Inst. Brew.
97, 353–357.
Milheiro, J.N., Filipe-Ribeiro, L., Cosme, F., Nunes, F.M., 2016. A simple, cheap and reliable method for control
of 4-ethylphenol and 4-ethylguaiacol in red wines: screening of fining agents for reducing volatile phenols
levels in red wines. J. Chromatogr. 1041–1042, 183–190.
Mills, D.A., Phister, T., Neeley, E., Johannsen, E., 2008. Wine fermentation. In: Cocolin, L., Ercolini, D. (Eds.),
Molecular Techniques in the Microbial Ecology of Fermented Foods. Springer, New York, pp. 162–192
(Chapter 6).

310

Chapter 9

Mira de Orduna, R., Patchett, M., Liu, S., Pilone, G., 2001. Growth and arginine metabolism of the wine lactic
acid bacteria Lactobacillus buchneri and Oenococcus oeni at different pH values and arginine concentrations.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67, 1657–1662.
Morata, A., Gómez-Cordovés, M.C., Calderón, F., Suárez, J.A., 2006. Effects of pH, temperature, and SO2 on the
formation of pyranoanthocyanins during red wine fermentation with two species of Saccharomyces. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 106, 123–129.
Morata, A., Vejarano, R., Ridolfi, G., Benito, S., Palomero, F., Uthurry, C., Tesfaye, W., González, C., SuárezLepe, J.A., 2013. Reduction of 4-ethylphenol production in red wines using HCDC+ yeasts and cinnamyl
esterases. Enz. Microbial Technol. 52, 99–104.
Moreno-Arribas, M., Polo, M., Jorganes, F., Munoz, R., 2003. Screening of biogenic amine production by lactic
acid bacteria isolated from grape must and wine. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 84, 117–123.
Nakanishi, K., Tokuda, H., Soga, T., Yoshinaga, T., Takeda, M., 1997. Effect of electric current on growth and
alcohol production by yeast cells. J. Ferment. Bioeng. 85, 250–253.
Nehmé, B., Ganga, M., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2006. The arginine deiminase locus of Oenococcus oeni includes a
putative arginyl-tRNA synthetase ArgS2 at its 3’-end. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 70, 590–597.
Nieto-Rojo, R., Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., Garrifo, J.J., 2014. Sorption of 4-ethylguaicol and 4-ethylphenol on yeast
cell walls, using a synthetic wine. Food Chem. 152, 399–406.
Office International de la Vigne et du Vin, 2009,. International code of oenological practices. OIV, Paris, p. 259.
Office International de la Vigne et du Vin, 2010,. International code of oenological practices. OIV, Paris, p. 274.
Office International de la Vigne et du Vin, 2011. Compendium of International Methods for the Analysis of
Wines and Musts. Available from: http://news.reseau-concept.net/pls/news/p_entree?i_sid=&i_type_edition_
id=20508&i_section_id=20510&I _lang= 33.
Ough, C.S., 1975. Dimethyldicarbonate as a wine sterilant. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 26, 130–133.
Ough, C.S., Ingraham, J.L., 1961. The diethylester of pyrocarbonic acid as a bottled-wine sterilizing agent. Am. J.
Enol. Viticult. 12, 149–151.
Ough, C.S., Crowell, E.A., Gutlove, B.R., 1988a. Carbamyl compound reactions with ethanol. Am. J. Enol.
Viticult. 39, 239–242.
Ough, C.S., Crowell, E.A., Mooney, L.A., 1988b. Formation of ethyl carbamate precursors during grape juice
(chardonnay) fermentation. I. addition of amino acids, urea, and ammonia: effects of fortification on
intracellular and extracellular precursors. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 39, 243–249.
Paiva, S., Devaux, F., Barbosa, S., Jacq, C., Casal, M., 2004. Ady2p is essential for the acetate permease activity in
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 21, 201–210.
Palaniappan, S., Sastry, S.K., Richter, E.R., 1992. Effects of electroconductive heat treatment and electrical
pretreatment on thermal death kinetics of selected microorganisms. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 39, 225–232.
Paul, R., 2002. MO: where now? In: Allen, M., Bell, S., Rowe, N., Wall, G. (Eds.), Use of Gases in Winemaking.
Proceedings of Seminar held in Adelaide, October 10, 2002. Australian Society of Viticulture and Oenology,
Adelaide, Australia, pp. 18–22.
Pizarro, F., Vargas, F.A., Agosin, E., 2007. A systems biology perspective of wine fermentations. Yeast 24 (11),
977–991.
Plata, C., Millán, C., Mauricio, J.C., Ortega, J.M., 2003. Formation of ethyl acetate and isoamyl acetate by various
species of wine yeasts. Food Microbiol. 20 (2), 217–224.
Pollnitz, A.P., Pardon, K.H., Sefton, M.A., 2000. Quantitative analysis of 4-ethylphenol and 4 ethylguaiacol in red
wine. J. Chromatogr. 874, 101–109.
Portugal, C., Sáenz, Y., Rojo-Bezares, B., Zaragoza, M., Torres, C., Cacho, J., Ruiz-Larrea, F., 2014.
Brettanomyces susceptibility to antimicrobial agents used in winemaking: in vitro and practical approaches.
Eur. Food Technol. 238, 641–652.
Pozo-Bayón, M.A., G-Alegría, E., Polo, M.C., Tenorio, C., Martín-Alvarez, P.J., Calvo de la Banda, M.T., Ruiz-Larrea,
F., Moreno-Arribas, M.V., 2005. Wine volatile and amino acid composition after malolactic fermentation: effect
of Oenococcus oeni and Lactobacillus plantarum starter cultures. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 8729–8735.
Pradelles, R., Alexandre, H., Ortiz-Julien, A., Chassagne, D., 2008. Effects of yeast cell wall characteristics on
4-ethylphenol sorption capacity in model wine. J. Agric. Food Chem. 56 (24), 11854–11861.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

311

Pramateftaki, P., Metafa, M., Kallithraka, S., Lanaridis, P., 2006. Evolution of malolactic bacteria and biogenic
amines during spontaneous malolactic fermentations in a Greek winery. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 43, 155–160.
Pretorius, I.S., 2000. Tailoring wine yeast for the new millennium: novel approaches to the ancient art of
winemaking. Yeast 16 (8), 675–729.
Puértolas, E., Lopez, N., Condon, S., Raso, J., Alvarez, I., 2009a. Pulsed electric fields inactivation of wine
spoilage yeast and bacteria. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 130, 49–55.
Puértolas, E., Lopez, N., Condon, S., Alvarez, I., Raso, J., 2010. Potential applications of PEF to improve red wine
quality. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 21, 247–255.
Puértolas, E., López, N., Saldaña, G., Álvarez, I., Raso, J., 2009b. Evaluation of phenolic extraction during
fermentation of red grapes treated by a continuous pulsed electric fields process at pilot-plant scale. J. Food
Eng. 98, 120–125.
Puértolas, E., Luengo, E., Alvarez, I., Raso, J., 2012. Improving mass transfer to soften tissues by pulsed electric
fields: fundamentals and applications. Ann. Rev. Food Sci. Techol. 3, 263–282.
Quintela, S., Villaran, M.C., López De Armentia, I., Elejalde, E., 2012a. Ochratoxin A removal from red wine by
several oenological fining agents: bentonite, egg albumin, allergen-free adsorbents, chitin and chitosan. Food
Addit. Contam. 29, 1168–1174.
Quintela, S., Villarán, M.C., López de Armentia, I., Elejalde, E., 2012b. Ochratoxin A in Spanish exportation wine
market. Food Control 25, 501–504.
Rajnicek, A.M., McCaig, C.D., Gow, N.A.R., 1994. Electric fields induce curved growth of Ent. cloacae, E. coli, and
B. subtilis cells: implications for mechanisms of galvanotropism and bacterial growth. J. Bacteriol. 176, 702–713.
Ranalli, G., Iorizzo, M., Lustrato, G., Grazia, L., 2002. Effects of low electric treatment on yeast microflora. J.
Appl. Microbiol. 93, 877–883.
Remize, F., Andrieu, E., Dequin, S., 2000. Engineering of the pyruvate dehydrogenase bypass in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: Role of the cytosolic Mg2+ and mitochondrial K+ acetaldehyde dehydrogenases Ald6p and Ald4p
in acetate formation during alcoholic fermentation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 3151–3159.
Renouf, V., Strehaiano, P., Lanvoud-Funel, A., 2008. Effectiveness of dimethlydicarbonate to prevent
Brettanomyces bruxellensis growth in wine. Food Control 19, 208–2016.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Dubourdieu, D., Donèche, B., Lonvaud, A., 2000a. Biochemistry of alcoholic fermentation
and metabolic pathways of wine yeasts. In: John Wiley, Sons, Ltd (Eds.), The Microbiology of Wine and
Vinifications, Handbook of Enology, Vol. 1. first ed. Chichester, England, pp. 51–74.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Glories, Y., Maujean, A., Dubourdieu, D., 2006a. Alcohols and other volatile compounds,
second ed. Handbook of Enology, vol. 2: The Chemistry of Wine Stabilization and Treatments. John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, UK, pp. 51–64.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Dubourdieu, D., Donèche, B., Lonvaud, A., 2006b. The microbiology of wine and
vinifications. Handbook of Enology, vol. 1, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Richter, H., Vlad, D., Unden, G., 2001. Significance of pantothenate for glucose fermentation by Oenococcus oeni
and for suppression of the erythritol and acetate production. Arch. Microbiol. 75, 26–31.
Riley, M.R., Muzziom, F.J., Reyes, S.C., 1990. Experimental and modeling studies of diffusion in immobilized
cell systems. Appl. Bioch. Biotechnol. 80, 151–188.
Rodrigues, F., 1998. Estudos sobre a regulação do metabolismo intracelular de ácido acético na levedura
Zygosaccharomyces bailli ISA 1307. Tese de Mestrado, Universidade do Minho, Braga.
Romano, P., Suzzi, G., Comi, G., Zironi, R., 1992. Higher alcohol and acetic acid production by apiculate wine
yeasts. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 73, 126–130.
Romano, P., Marchese, R., Laurita, C., Salzano, G., Turbanti, L., 1999. Biotechnological suitability of
Saccharomycodes ludwigii for fermented beverages. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 15, 451–545.
Rooney-Latham, S., Janousek, C.N., Eskalen, A., Gubler, W.D., 2008. First report of Aspergillus carbonarius
causing sour rot of table grapes (Vitis vinifera) in California. Plant Dis. 92 (4), 651.
Rosazza, J.P.N., Huang, Z., Dostal, L., Volm, T., Rousseau, B., 1995. Review: biocatalytic transformations of
ferulic acid: an abundant aromatic natural product. J. Ind. Microbiol. 15, 457–471.
Roullier-Gall, C., Boutegrabet, L., Gougeon, R.D., Schmitt-Kopplin, P., 2014. A grape and wine chemodiversity
comparison of different appellations in burgundy: vintage vs. terroir effects. Food Chem. 152, 100–107.

312

Chapter 9

Russo, P., Capozzi, V., Spano, G., Corbo, M.R., Sinigaglia, M., Bevilacqua, A., 2016. Metabolites of microbial
origin with an impact on health: ochratoxin A and biogenic amines. Front. Microbiol. 8, 482.
Salminen, S., Nybom, S., Meriluoto, J., Collado, M.C., Vesterlund, S., El-Nezami, H., 2010. Interaction of
probiotics and pathogens: benefits to human health? Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 21, 157–167.
Santos, M.C., Nunes, C., Saraiva, J.A., Coimbra, M.A., 2012. Chemical and physical methodologies for the
replacement/reduction of sulfur dioxide use during winemaking: review of their potentialities and limitations.
Eur. Food Res. Technol. 234, 1–12.
Schlatter, J., Lutz, W.K., 1990. The carcinogenesis potential of ethyl carbamate: risk assessment at human dietary
exposure levels. Food Chem. Toxicol. 28, 205–221.
Schuller, D., 2010. Better yeast for better wine: genetic improvement of Saccharomyces cerevisiae winemaking
strains. In: Rai, M., Kövics, G. (Eds.), Progress in Mycology. Scientific Publishers, Jodhpur, India, pp 1–51.
Schüller, H.J., 2003. Transcriptional control of nonfermentative metabolism in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Curr. Genet. 43 (3), 139–160.
Schuller, D., Côrte-Real, M., Leão, C., 2000. A differential medium for the enumeration of the spoilage yeast
Zygosaccharomyces bailii in wine. J. Food Prot. 63 (11), 1570–1575.
Sekiguchi, Y., Makita, H., Yamamura, A., Matsumoto, K., 2004. A thermostable histamine oxidase from
Arthrobacter crystallopoietes KAIT-B-007. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 97, 104–110.
Shi, W., Lentz, M.J., Adler, J., 1993. Behavioral responses of E. coli to changes in temperature caused by electric
shock. J. Bacteriol. 175, 5785–5790.
Silva, I., Campos, F., Hogg, T., Couto, J.A., 2011a. Factors influencing the production of volatile phenols by wine
lactic acid bacteria. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 145, 471–475.
Silva, I., Campos, F., Hogg, T., Couto, J.A., 2011b. Wine phenolic compounds influence the production of volatile
phenols by wine-related lactic acid bacteria. J. Appl. Microbiol. 111, 360–370.
Singh, M., Sharma, R., Banerjee, U.C., 2002. Biotechnological applications of cyclodextrins. Biotechnol. Adv. 20
(5-6), 341–359.
Soares, E.V., 2011. Flocculation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a review. J. Appl. Microbiol. 110, 1–18.
Somma, S., Perrone, G., Logrieco, A.F., 2012. Diversity of black Aspergilli and mycotoxin risks in grape, wine
and dried vine fruits: review. Phytopathol. Mediterr. 51 (1), 131–147.
Sousa, J.M., Rofrigues, F., Côrte-Real, M., Leão, C., 1998. Mechanisms underlying the transport and intracellular
metabolism of acetic acid in the presence of glucose in the yeast Zygosaccharomyces bailii. Microbiology
144 (3), 665–670.
Spano, G., Beneduce, L., de Palma, M.A., Vernile, A., Massa, S., 2006. Characterization of wine Lactobacillus
plantarum by PCR-DGGE and RAPD-PCR analysis and identification of Lactobacillus plantarum strains
able to degrade arginine. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 22, 769–773.
Sponholz, W.R., 1993. Wine spoilage by microorganisms. In: Fleet, G.H. (Ed.), Wine Microbiology and
Biotechnology. Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur, Switerzland, pp. 395–420.
Suárez-Lepe, J.A., Morata, A., 2012. New trends in yeast selection for winemaking. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 23,
39–50.
Sumby, K.M., Grbin, P.R., Jiranek, V., 2014. Implications of new research and technologies for malolactic
fermentation in wine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98, 8111–8132.
Tao, J., Stuart, I.D., Kilmartin, P.A., 2007. Effect of SO2 concentration on polyphenol development during red
wine MO. J. Agric. Food Chem. 55, 6104–6109.
Tegmo-Larsson, I.-M., Spittler, T.D., 1990. Temperature and light effects on ethyl carbamate formation in wine
during storage. J. Food Sci. 55, 6104–6109.
Terrade, N., Mira de Orduna, R., 2006. Impact of winemaking practices on arginine and citrulline metabolism
during and after malolactic fermentation. J. Appl. Microbiol 101, 406–411.
Terrel, F.R., Morris, J.R., Jonhson, M.G., Gbur, E.E., Makus, D.J., 1993. Yeast inhibition in grape juice containing
sulfur dioxide, sorbic acid and dimethyldicarbonate. J. Food Sci. 58, 1132–1134.
Tonon, T., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2000. Metabolism of arginine and its positive effect on growth and revival of
Oenococcus oeni. J. Appl. Microbiol. 89, 526–531.

Wine Microbial Spoilage: Advances in Defects Remediation

313

Torrea-Goni, D., Ancín-Azpilicueta, C., 2001. Influence of yeast strain on biogenic amine contents in wines:
relationship with the utilization of amino acids during fermentation. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 52, 185–190.
Torrens, J., Urpi, P., Riu-Aumatell, M., Vichi, S., Lopez-Tamames, E., Buxaderas, S., 2008. Different commercial
yeast strains affecting the volatile and sensory profile of cava base wine. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 124, 48–57.
Vaqueres Vaquero, I., Marcobal, A., Munoz, R., 2004. Tannase activity by lactic acid bacteria isolated from grape
must and wine. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 96, 199–204.
Vilanova, M., Ugliano, M., Varela, C., Siebert, T., Pretorius, I.S., Henschke, P.A., 2007. Assimilable nitrogen
utilisation and production of volatile and nonvolatile compounds in chemically defined medium by
Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeasts. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77, 145–157.
Vilela, A., Amaral, C., Shuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Corte-Real, M., 2015. Combined use of Wallerstein and
Zygosaccharomyces bailii modified differential media to isolate yeasts for the controlled reduction of volatile
acidity of grape musts and wines. J. Biotech Res. 6, 43–53.
Vilela-Moura, A., 2010. Isolation and characterization of yeasts: application in controlled processes of volatile
acidity bio-reduction in wines. PhD Thesis, UTAD, Vila Real, 160 p.
Vilela, A., Schuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Côrte-Real, M., 2013. Reduction of volatile acidity of acidic wines by
immobilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97, 4991–5000.
Vilela-Moura, A., Schuller, D., Falco, V., Mendes-Faia, A., Côrte-Real, M., 2010a. Effect of refermentation
conditions and micro-oxygenation on the reduction of volatile acidity by commercial S. cerevisiae strains and
their impact on the aromatic profile of wines. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 141 (3), 165–172.
Vilela-Moura, A., Shuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Côrte-Real, M., 2008. Reduction of volatile acidity of wines by
selected yeast strains. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 80 (5), 881–890.
Vilela-Moura, A., Schuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Côrte-Real, M., 2010b. Effects of acetic acid, ethanol and SO2 on
the removal of volatile acidity from acidic wines by two Saccharomyces cerevisiae commercial strains. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 87 (4), 1317–1326.
Vilela-Moura, A., Schuller, D., Mendes-Faia, A., Silva, R.F., Chaves, S.R., Sousa, M.J., Côrte-Real, M., 2011.
The impact of acetate metabolism on yeast fermentative performance and wine quality: reduction of volatile
acidity of grape-musts and wines: minireview. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 89, 271–280.
Vincenzini, M., Guerrini, S., Mangani, S., Granchi, L., 2009. Amino acid metabolisms and production of
biogenic amines and ethyl carbamate. In: Helmut König, H., Unden, G., Fröhlich, J. (Eds.), Biology of
Microorganisms on Grapes, in Must and in Wine. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 167–180.
Walling, E., Gindreau, E., Lonvaud-Funel, A., 2001. La biosynthèse d’exopolysaccharide par des souches de
Pediococcusdamnosus isolées du vin: mise au point d’outils moléculaires de detection. Lait 81, 289–300.
Warth, A.D., 1988. Effect of benzoic acid on growth yield of yeasts differing in their resistance to
preservatives. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54 (8), 2091–2095.
Weaver, J.C., Chizmadzhev, Y.A., 1996. Theory of electroporation: a review. Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 41,
135–160.
Yamada, T., Fatigati, M.A., Zhang, M., 2002. Performance of immobilized Zymomonas mobilis 31821 (pZB5) on
actual hydrolysates produced by arkenol technology. Appl. Bioch. Biotechnol. 98, 899–907.
Yslas, E.I., Ibarra, L.E., Peralta, D.O., Barbero, C.A., Rivarola, V.A., Bertuzzi, M.L., 2012. Polyanilinenanofibers:
acute toxicity and teratogenic effect on Rhinellaarenarum embryos. Chemosphere 87, 1374–1380.
Zain, M.E., 2011. Impact of mycotoxins on humans and animals. J. Saudi. Chem. Soc. 15, 129–144.
Zimmerman, U., 1986. Electric breakdown, electropermeabilization and electrofision. Rev. Physiol. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 105, 196–256.
Zoecklein, B.W., Fugelsang, K.C., Gump, B.H., Nury, F.S., 1995. Wine Analysis and Production, first ed.
Chapmann & Hall, New York.
Zuehlke, J.M., Petrova, B., Edwards, C.G., 2013. Advances in the control of wine spoilage by Zygosaccharomyces
and Dekkera/Brettanomyces. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 4, 57–78.
Zuniga, M., Miralles Md, M.C., Perez-Martinez, G., 2002. The product of arcR, the sixth gene of the arc operon of
Lactobacillus sakei, is essential for expression of the arginine deiminase pathway. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
68, 6051–6058.

314

Chapter 9

Further Reading
Casal, M., Leão, C., 1995. Utilization of short-chain monocarboxylic acids by the yeast Torulaspora delbrueckii:
specificity of the transport systems and their regulation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1267, 122–130.
Commission Regulation (EC) No 53/2011, 2011. Amending Regulation (EC) No. 606/2009 laying down certain
detailed rules for implementing Council Regulation (EC) No. 479/2008 as regards the categories of grapevine
products, oenological practices and the applicable restrictions.
Martin, M., Fernandez, M., Linares, D., Alvarez, M., 2005. Sequencing, characterization and transcriptional
analysis of the histidine decarboxylase operon of Lactobacillus buchneri. Microbiol. 151, 1219–1228.
O’Donnell, K., 1993. Fusarium and its near relatives. In: Reynolds, D.R., Taylor, J.W. (Eds.), The fungal
holomorph: mitotic, meiotic and pleomorphic speciation in fungal systematics. CABI, Wallingford, pp
225–233.
Ough, C.S., Langbehn, L.L., 1976. Measurement of methylcarbamate by the addition of dimethyl dicarbonate to
model solution and wines. J. Agric. Food Chem. 24, 428–430.
Perez, L., Valcarcel, M.J., Gonzalez, P., Domecq, B., 1991. Influence of Botrytis infection of the grapes on the
biological aging process of fino sherry. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 42, 58–62.
Peterson, T., Ough, C.S., 1979. Dimethyldicarbonate reaction with high alcohols. Am. J. Enol. Viticult. 30, 119.
Ribéreau-Gayon, P., Glories, Y., Maujean, A., Dubourdieu, D., 2000b. Chemical nature, origins and consequences
of the main organoleptic defects. The chemistry of Wine Stabilization and Treatments, Handbook of Enology,
vol. 2, first ed. John Wiley, Sons, Ltd, Chichester, England, pp. 209–253.
Zaman, M.Z., Abu Bakar, F., Selamat, J., Bakar, J., 2010. Occurrence of biogenic amines and amines degrading
bacteria in fish sauce. Czech J. Food Sci. 28, 440–449.

