Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)
B Jarvis, Daubies Farm, Upton Bishop, Ross-on-Wye, UK
Ó 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Cider (cyder, United States: hard cider) is an alcoholic beverage
produced by the fermentation of apple juice; a related product,
perry (also known as pear cider) is produced by the fermentation of pear juice. Cider and perry have been produced for
more than 2000 years in temperate areas of the world. Traditional cidermaking in England, France (Normandy and Brittany), northern Spain, Ireland, and Germany is based largely on
farmhouse production; in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, farm laborers in England received up to 2 l cider
day1 as part of their wages.
In England, commercial cidermaking started during the late
nineteenth century, although some farmhouse cider had been
sold commercially since the eighteenth century. Total cider
production in England in 1900 was estimated at 0.25  106 hl,
of which about 0.025  106 hl was produced commercially. In
2010, total European production of cider and perry was
14.3  106 hl, of which the United Kingdom produced about
9  106 hl, mostly as commercial products. Commercial ciders
are now produced also in Argentina, Austria, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, China, Finland, New Zealand, South Africa,
Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States.

Cider Production
Ciders are made by fermenting the juice of apples, often with
some added pear juice. The juice may be either fresh or
reconstituted from concentrate. In England, France, and Spain,
most cider is produced from the juice of special cultivars of
cider apples, referred to as bittersweet, bitter-sharp, sweet, or
sharp, depending on the relative levels of tannins and acids.
Such ciders have a higher degree of astringency than those
made from the juice of culinary or dessert apples. The alcohol
content of cider made only from juice ranges up to about 6.5%
alcohol by volume (abv), depending on the sugar content of
the apple juice. In many countries, chaptalization (i.e., the
addition of fermentation sugars) is practiced widely, especially
in years when juice sugars are low. In some cases, the total
fermentable sugar may be increased so that the fermented
product contains up to 12% abv. Such strong ciders are blended
and/or diluted to produce commercial ciders within the range
1.2–8.5% abv. Products with a higher alcohol content are
generally sold as apple wine.

Preparation of Cider Juice
The fruit is transported from the orchards to the cider mill,
where it is washed and milled using equipment such as a knife
mill. The milled fruit is pressed using either batch or continuous presses, and the solid residue (pomace) from the ﬁrst
pressing may be extracted with water to maximize the yield of
sugar and tannins. In some processes, the milled fruit may be

Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology, Volume 1

liqueﬁed by treatment with pectolytic and amylolytic enzymes,
before centrifugation to separate the juice from residual solids.
The spent apple pomace is used for the extraction of pectin (if
enzyme treatment has not been used), as cattle feed or as a soil
conditioner.
The juice is normally treated with SO2 gas or sodium metabisulﬁte to a level of 100–200 mg l1 and is allowed to stand
for 24 h before use. If a clear juice is required, the cloudy
pressed juice may be treated with pectinases and amylases;
enzyme treatment is normal if the juice is to be concentrated for
storage purposes.
Concentrated juices are generally prepared in a multistage
evaporator and may have volatile aromas added back. The
concentrate, at about 72 Bx, can be stored for 2 or 3 years at
refrigeration temperatures without serious loss of quality. The
concentrate is diluted with an appropriate volume of water to
reconstitute it for fermentation.

Cider Fermentation
The juice is transferred to fermentation vats, where yeast
nutrients such as ammonium phosphate, ammonium
carbonate, and pantothenic acid are added, together with any
chaptalizing sugars and an appropriate yeast culture. Fermentation is allowed to proceed at 15–25  C until all the
fermentable sugars have been used, which usually takes about
3–8 weeks, depending on the temperature. The raw cider is
sometimes chilled, to facilitate ﬂocculation of the yeast, before
being racked off from the lees and transferred to other vats for
maturation. The maturation process can take up to 2 months,
but the cider is often matured for more than a year before
further processing.

Final Preparation
The strong cider base (up to 12% abv) is centrifuged and/or
ﬁned to remove solids; increasingly, microﬁltration processes
are being used commercially to produce a bright cider that is
blended with apple juice or water to give an appropriate level of
alcohol (usually 3.5–8.5% abv). At this stage, sweetener and
other ingredients may be added to adjust the acid–sweetness
balance, according to the organoleptic style of cider required.
Increasingly, ﬂavoring with fruit juices such as cranberry or
raspberry also gains popularity. The blended cider may be
carbonated and packaged into bottles, cans, kegs, or barrels for
distribution and sale, or it may be packaged as a still product
without carbonization. Processes involved in the preparation
of certain special ciders are discussed later in this chapter.

The Microbiology of Apple Juice and Cider
The fermentation of apple juice to cider occurs naturally
through the metabolic activity of the yeasts and bacteria present

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384730-0.00066-5

437

438

Table 1

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)

Typical microbial contaminants of freshly pressed apple juice

Typical species
Yeasts
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
var. cerevisiae
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
var. uvarum
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
var. carlsbergensis
Saccharomycodes ludwigii
Kloeckera apiculata
Candida pulcherrima
Pichia spp.
Torulopsis famata
Rhodotorula spp.
Filamentous fungi
Penicillium spp.
Aspergillus spp.
Paecilomyces varioti
Byssochlamys fulva
Cladosporium spp.
Botrytis spp.
Bacteria
Acetobacter xylinum
Pseudomonas spp.
Escherichia coli
Salmonella spp.
Micrococcus spp.
Bacillus spp.
Clostridium spp.

SO2 sensitivity

Growth in juice

 or a

þþþþb

 or 

þþþþ

 or 

þþþþ


þþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþ
þþþþ

þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ

þþ
þþþþ
þ

þþþþ
þ

þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþ
þþþþ

þþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
þþþþ
 (spores)
 (spores)

þþþþ

 (some strains )





the ﬁnal product in Europe is 200 mg l1 but different limits
may apply elsewhere. The addition of SO2 to apple juice results
in the formation of so-called sulﬁte addition compounds,
through binding to carbonyls. When dissolved in water, SO2 or
its salts produce a mixture of molecular SO2, bisulﬁte, and
sulﬁte ions, the equilibrium of which is pH dependent
(Figure 1). The antimicrobial activity of SO2 is due to the
molecular SO2 that remains unbound (the so-called free SO2).
Less SO2 is needed in juices of high acidity: for instance,
15 mg l1 of free SO2 at pH 3 has the same antimicrobial effect
as 150 mg l1 at pH 4.
The binding of SO2 is dependent on the nature of the
carbonyl compounds present in the juice. Naturally occurring
compounds that bind SO2 include glucose, xylose, and xylosone. If the fruit has undergone any degree of rotting, other
binding compounds are formed, including 2,5-dioxogluconic
acid and 5-oxofructose (2,5-D-threo-hexodiulose). Such juices
require increased additions of SO2 if wild yeasts and other
microorganisms are to be controlled effectively. The addition of
SO2 to fermenting juice results in rapid combination with
acetaldehyde, pyruvate, and a-oxoglutarate produced by the
fermenting yeasts. Consequently, all additions of SO2 must be
completed immediately after pressing the juice although,
provided initial fermentation is inhibited, further additions to
give the desired level of free SO2 can be made during the
following 24 h. Studies have shown that the presence of sulﬁtebinding compounds in fermented cider depends on the quality
of the original fruit, the type of apple juice (i.e., cider, dessert,

 (resistant), , þ, þþ, þþþ, þþþþ (increasing sensitivity).
 (unable to grow), , þ, þþ, þþþ, þþþþ (increasing ability to grow).

a

100

b

The Role of SO2 in Apple Juice and Cider
The use of SO2 as a preservative in cidermaking is controlled by
legislation in most countries. The maximum level permitted in

SO2

% of total SO2

on the fruit at harvest, which are transferred into the apple juice
on pressing. Other microorganisms, from the milling and
pressing equipment and the general environment, can also
contaminate the juice at this stage. Examples of typical juiceassociated organisms are shown in Table 1, together with an
indication of their susceptibility to SO2 and their ability to
grow in apple juice. Unless such organisms are inhibited, for
example, by the use of SO2, a mixed fermentation occurs. This
causes signiﬁcant variations in organoleptic characteristics
between batches, even if the composition of the apple juice
remains constant.
The preferred approach for the production of commercial
cider is by inoculation with a selected strain of a Saccharomyces
spp., following control of the indigenous and adventitious
microorganisms using sulﬁte and/or pasteurization. However,
the transfer of fermented juice into different maturation and
storage vessels may result in a secondary fermentation by
microorganisms that occur naturally in the traditional oak vats
which are frequently used. These organisms may produce
beneﬁcial or detrimental changes in the chemical and organoleptic properties of the ﬁnal cider.

SO3

HSO3

50

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

pH value
Molecular
SO2

bisulfite
–
HSO3

sulfite
–
SO3

Figure 1 Distribution of sulﬁte, bisulﬁte, and molecular SO2 as a function of pH in aqueous solution. Reproduced with permission from
Hammond, S.M., Carr, J.G., 1976. The antimicrobial activity of SO2 – with
particular reference to fermented and non-fermented fruit juices. In:
Skinner, F.A., Hugo, W.B. (Eds.), Inhibition and Inactivation of Vegetative
Microbes. Academic Press, London. pp. 89–110 (S.A.B. Symposium
Series No. 5).

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)

or culinary juice) and whether pectinases were used for clariﬁcation, the strain of yeast and its ability to produce sulﬁte
compounds, the fermentation conditions, and the extent to
which yeast nutrients have been added.

Fermentation Yeasts
In traditional farmhouse cidermaking, especially when the
juice is not sulﬁte treated, the indigenous yeasts that are
important in fermentation include Candida spp., Kloeckera
apiculata, and Saccharomyces spp. Generally, the Candida and
Kloeckera die out within the ﬁrst few days, but they may be
important in the initial fermentation. When the juice has been
treated with sulﬁte, the fermentation process is carried out
primarily by strains of Saccharomyces spp., especially S. cerevisiae
vars. cerevisiae, bayanus, capensis, carlsbergensis, and uvarum.
In commercial practice, speciﬁc strains are added to the
sulﬁte-treated juice as a pure culture. The starter culture is
prepared in the laboratory from freeze-dried or liquid-nitrogenfrozen cultures, which are resuscitated and then cultivated by
increasing volumes of a suitable culture medium, to give an
inoculum for use in a starter propagation plant. The nature of
the cultivation medium varies, but it is often based on sterile
apple juice supplemented with appropriate nitrogenous
substrates and vitamins, such as pantothenate and thiamin.
Increasingly, commercially produced dried or frozen yeast cell
preparations are used, either for direct vat inoculation or as
inocula for the yeast propagation plant. The condition of the
yeast at pitching is critically important – the culture must have
both high viability and high vitality if cider fermentation at
high original gravity is to be effective. The ideal attributes of
a cider fermentation yeast are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2

Desirable characteristics of yeasts for cidermaking

Attribute

Objective

Produces polygalacturonase
High vitality and viability,
producing consistently high
fermentation rate
Resistant to SO2 and low pH
Resistant to high original
gravity and ethanol
Ferments to dryness
Does not produce excessive
foam
Strongly ﬂocculant
Minimal production of SO2
Minimal production of SO2
binding compounds
Nonproducer of H2S and acetic
acid
Compatible with malolactic
bacteria
Good production of aroma
compounds, organic acids,
and glycerol

Hydrolyzes soluble pectin
Strong fermentation
characteristics
Competes well with wild yeasts
Good commercial
characteristics
Efﬁcient utilization of sugars
Avoids product loss from
frothing
Ensures good racking off
Avoids excessive levels of SO2
Minimizes binding of SO2
Avoids undesirable
metabolites
Important for malolactic
fermentation
Important for ﬂavor production

Modiﬁed from Jarvis, B., Forster, M.J., Kinsella, W.P., 1995. Factors affecting the
development of cider ﬂavour. In: Board, R.G., Jones, D., Jarvis, B. (Eds.), Microbial
Fermentations: Beverages, Foods and Feeds. J. Appl. Bacteriol. Symp. Suppl., 79,
pp. 5s–18s (S.A.B. Symposium Series No. 24).

439

After inoculation, the starter yeasts, together with SO2
resistant wild yeasts selected from the juice, increase in number
from an initial level of about 105 cfu ml1 to 5  106 –
5  107 cfu ml1. Following an initial aerobic growth phase,
the resulting O2 limitation and high carbohydrate levels in the
media trigger the onset of the anaerobic fermentation process.
Fermentation typically takes some 3–8 weeks to proceed to
dryness (S.G. 0.990–1.000) at which time all fermentable
sugars have been converted to alcohol, CO2, and other
metabolites.
In controlled fermentations, a maximum temperature of
25  C will generally be permitted, although slow fermentation
at or below 16  C is common in some countries, especially in
France. Because of the exothermic nature of the fermentation
process, temperatures of 30  C or above can be attained during
periods of high ambient temperature. In Australia, it is not
uncommon for temperatures as high as 35–40  C to occur in
the vat, in the absence of a cooling facility. Generally,
temperatures >25  C are considered undesirable, because
during rapid fermentation many desirable ﬂavor compounds
are not produced, some undesirable ﬂavors are produced, and
alcohols and other metabolites may be lost by evaporation. In
addition, the activity of the desirable yeast strain may be
inhibited, leading to stuck fermentations and the growth of
undesirable thermoduric yeasts and spoilage bacteria. Stuck
fermentations can sometimes be restarted by the addition
of nitrogen (10–50 mg l1), usually as ammonium sulfate or
di-ammonium phosphate, together with thiamine (0.1–
0.2 mg l1) and/or a yeast cell wall (ghost cell) preparation.
At the end of fermentation, the yeast cells ﬂocculate and
settle to the bottom of the vat – this process may be aided by
chilling the cider in the vat. A certain amount of cell autolysis
occurs, liberating cell constituents into the cider. The raw cider
is racked off the lees (i.e., the settled yeast cells) as a cloudy
product and is transferred to storage vats for maturation. In
some plants, the cider may be centrifuged or rough-ﬁltered at
this time. If the cider is left too long on the lees, autolysis may
become excessive, leading to an increase in nitrogenous materials, which act as substrates for subsequent undesirable
microbial growth and the development of off ﬂavors in the
product.

Maturation and Secondary Fermentation
Traditionally, cider vats are made of wood (usually oak). The
wood acts as a reservoir of microorganisms, such as yeasts and
lactic acid bacteria which are important in the secondary
fermentation of cider (Figure 2); undesirable organisms, such
as acetic acid bacteria, may also occur. Modern processes using
sterilizable stainless steel vats for fermentation and maturation
lack the native microﬂora. If secondary fermentation is
required, it is necessary either to inoculate the vats with
a culture of malolactic organisms suitable for cider (N.B.
malolactic cultures sold for wine are generally unsuitable for
cider making) or to use a process of backslopping, in which
part of an earlier batch of matured cider is used as an inoculum
(with all the inherent risks of such action). The maturation vats
are ﬁlled with racked-off cider and provided with an overblanket of CO2 or otherwise sealed to prevent the ingress of air,
which would stimulate the growth of undesirable ﬁlm-forming

440

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)

Figure 2 Electron micrograph of a section 1.2 cm below the surface of
an oak wood block suspended in fermented cider for 10 weeks, showing
individual yeast and bacterial cells within the structure of the wood.
Reproduced with permission from Swafﬁeld, C.H., Scott, J.A., Jarvis, B.,
1997. Observations on the microbial ecology of traditional alcoholic cider
storage vats. Food Microbiol. 14, 353–361.

yeasts (e.g., Brettanomyces spp., Pichia membranaefaciens,
Candida mycoderma) and aerobic bacteria (e.g., Acetobacter
xylinum).
During the maturation process, the growth of malolactic
acid bacteria (e.g., Lactobacillus pastorianus var. quinicus, L. mali,
L. plantarum, Leuconostoc mesenteroides and other species, and
Pediococcus spp.) can occur extensively, especially if wooden
vats are used. The malolactic fermentation (MLF) results in the
conversion of malic acid to lactic acid and also produces
secondary metabolites. The MLF reduces the acidity of the cider
and imparts subtle changes that improve the ﬂavor of the
product. However, in certain circumstances, metabolites of
the lactic acid bacteria may damage the ﬂavor and result in
spoilage – for instance, excessive production of diacetyl (and its
vicinal-diketone precursors), the butterscotch-like taste of
which can be detected in cider at a threshold level of about
0.6 mg l1.
In ciders made without SO2, such as the farmhouse ciders of
the Basque region of Spain, it is common for the MLF to occur
concurrently with the yeast fermentation. This leads to complex
ﬂavor development and, because the lactic acid bacteria also
metabolize some of the sugar, to reduced alcohol levels.

Pathogenic and Spoilage Microorganisms in Cider
Bacterial pathogens such as Salmonella spp., Escherichia coli, and
Staphylococcus aureus may occasionally occur in apple juice,
being derived from the orchard soil, farm and processing
equipment, or human sources. Outbreaks of food poisoning
have occurred because of E. coli O157: H7 strains in freshly
pressed nonpasteurized apple juice (usually known in the
United States simply as cider). Normally, the acidity of both
apple juice and fermented cider prevents the growth of pathogens, which survive for only a few hours. However, the speciﬁc
strains of E. coli involved in food poisoning have a greater
tolerance to acid and can survive for up to 30 days at 20  C in

apple juice. These strains are destroyed by normal pasteurization conditions and do not survive in fermenting cider for more
than 2–3 days because of the interaction of alcohol and acidity.
The presence of bacterial endospores from species of Bacillus
and Clostridium may be indicative of poor plant hygiene. They
can survive for long periods and are frequently found in cider;
however, because of its low pH value, they do not create
a spoilage or health threat.
The juice from unsound fruits and juice contaminated
within the pressing plant may show extensive contamination
by microfungi, such as Penicillium expansum, P. crustosum,
Aspergillus niger, A. nidulans, A. fumigatus, Paecilomyces varioti,
Byssochlamys fulva, Monascus ruber, Phialophora mustea, and
species of Alternaria, Cladosporium, Botrytis, Oosporidium, and
Fusarium. None of these are of particular concern in cidermaking, except that spores of heat-resistant species, such as
Byssochlamys spp., can survive pasteurization and grow in cider
if it is not adequately carbonated.
The growth of P. expansum on apples leads to the occurrence
of the mycotoxin patulin in the apple juice. Most countries
have imposed a guideline limit of 50 mg l1 for patulin. At high
levels, patulin inhibits the yeasts used as starter cultures, but
they metabolize the patulin under anaerobic fermentation
conditions within a few days, to form a number of compounds,
including ascladiol. Patulin, therefore, would not be expected
to occur in cider unless patulin-contaminated juice were added
to sweeten the fermented cider.
The role of organisms, such as Brettanomyces spp. and Acetobacter xylinum, in the spoilage of ciders during the latter stages
of fermentation and maturation was mentioned previously. Of
equal concern is the yeast Saccharomycodes ludwigii, which is
often resistant to SO2 levels as high as 1000–1500 mg l1.
S. ludwigii is an indigenous contaminant of cidermaking facilities and can grow slowly during all the stages of fermentation
and maturation. Its presence in bulk stocks of cider does not
cause an overt problem. However, if it is able to contaminate
‘bright’ cider at bottling, its growth will result in a butyric ﬂavor
and the presence of ﬂaky particles that spoil the appearance of
the product. Although the organism is sensitive to pasteurization, it is not unknown for it to contaminate products at the
packaging stage, either as a low-level contaminant of clean but
nonsterile containers or directly from the packaging plant and
its environment. Clumps of the organisms may also survive if it
is present in unﬁltered cider at the time of pasteurization.
Environmental contamination of ﬁnal products with yeasts,
such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae vars. cerevisiae, bailii, and uvarum
can also occur. These will metabolize residual or added sugar to
generate further alcohol and, more importantly, to increase the
concentration of CO2. Strains of these organisms are frequently
resistant to SO2. In bottles of bright cider inoculated with such
fermentative organisms, carbonation pressures up to 900 kPa
have been recorded. To avoid any risk of burst bottles, it is
essential to maintain an adequate level of free SO2 in the ﬁnal
product, particularly in multiserve containers that may be
opened and then stored with a reduced volume of cider.
Alternatively, a second preservative such as benzoic or sorbic
acid can be used, where permitted by legislation. This precaution is not necessary for products packaged in single-serve cans
and bottles, which receive a terminal pasteurization process
after ﬁlling.

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)

Some Special Fermentation and Other Processes
Keeving and Cidre Bouché
In France and parts of southwest England, the process of
keeving is used to prepare traditional cider. Apple pulp is
packed into barrels immediately after milling and held for 24 h
at 5  C; the thick juice is run into sulﬁte-treated barrels where
pectin esterases produce pectic acid. This reacts with calcium to
form an insoluble complex that rises slowly to the surface as the
wild-yeast fermentation proceeds, to produce a thick brown
cap. Pectin reacts also with tannins and proteins to form
a sediment and, at the end of the fermentation, a clear liquor is
drawn off between the brown cap and the sediment. The
product is a naturally sweet, relatively low-alcohol cider (ca.
4% abv) that is matured in bottles closed with wired mushroom stoppers. A typical French product of this process is cidre
bouché.

Traditional Conditioned Draught Cider
This product receives a secondary fermentation process. After
ﬁlling barrels with a bright cider, a small quantity of fermentable carbohydrate is added, followed by an inoculum of active
alcohol-resistant yeasts. The subsequent growth is accompanied by a low-level fermentation that generates sufﬁcient CO2
to produce a pétillant cider, together with a haze of yeast cells.
Such products have a shelf life in the barrel of about 4–6 weeks.

Double Fermented Cider
Double fermented products are initially fermented to an
alcohol content of about 5% abv and then chilled to stop the
fermentation process. The liquor is racked off immediately and
is either sterile-ﬁltered or pasteurized before transfer to
a second fermentation vat. Additional sugar and/or apple juice
is added and a secondary fermentation is induced following
inoculation with a selected alcohol-tolerant strain of Saccharomyces spp. Such a process permits the development of
complex ﬂavors in the cider.

Frankfürter Apfelwein mit Speierling
In Germany, most cider (apfelwein) production occurs in the
area around Frankfurt. One local specialty uses berries from the
Speierling tree (Sorbus domestica) to add astringency to the cider
that is made from culinary apples. The speierling berries are
placed into a muslin bag that is suspended in the fermenting
apple juice to permit extraction of the bitter ﬂavor constituents.
The product is extremely astringent.

Sparkling Ciders
Traditionally, sparkling ciders were prepared according to
the Méthode Champenoise. After bright ﬁltration, the fully
fermented dry cider is ﬁlled into bottles containing a small
amount of sugar and an appropriate Champagne yeast
culture. The bottles are corked, wired, and laid on their sides
for the secondary fermentation process, which will take 1–2
months at 5–18  C. Following this stage, the bottles are
placed in special racks with the neck in a downward

441

position. The bottles are gently shaken each day to move the
deposit down onto the cork, a process that can take up to 2
months. The disgorging process involves careful removal of
the cork and yeast ﬂoc without loss of any liquid; sometimes
the neck of the bottle is frozen to aid this process. The
disgorged product is then topped up using a syrup of
alcohol, cider, and sugar before ﬁnal corking, wiring, and
labeling. It is not difﬁcult to understand why this process is
rarely used nowadays. Most commercial sparkling ciders are
normally prepared by artiﬁcial carbonation to a level of 3.5–
4 vol. CO2.

Cider Vinegar
Fermented cider is refermented under aerobic conditions at
15–25  C using selected strains of Acetobacter spp. to produce
cider vinegar. The product typically contains up to 5% acetic
acid and is used for culinary purposes and for its reputed health
properties.

Further Processes
Fermented cider and perry may be distilled to produce spirit
liquors such as Eau-de-vie-de-cidre, cider brandy, and calvados.
Blends of cider and distilled cider liquor may be sold as
intermediate products: for instance, Cider Royale is a blend of
cider and cider brandy containing about 15–20% abv. Note
that the addition of distilled liquor to a cider is permitted only
if excise duty is levied as a spirit drink.

Biochemical Changes during Cidermaking
The chemical composition of cider is dependent on the
composition of the apple juice, the nature of the fermentation
yeasts, microbial contaminants and their metabolites, and any
additives used in the ﬁnal product.

Composition of Cider Apple Juice
Apple juice is a mixture of sugars (primarily fructose, glucose,
and sucrose), oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides (e.g.,
starch), together with malic, quinic, and citromalic acids;
tannins (i.e., polyphenols), amides, and other nitrogenous
compounds; soluble pectin; vitamin C; minerals; and a diverse
range of esters, in particular ethyl- and methyl-iso-valerate,
which give the typical apple-like aroma. The relative proportions are dependent on the variety of apple; the environmental
and cultural conditions under which it was grown; the state of
maturity of the fruit at the time of pressing; the extent of
physical and biological damage (e.g., rotting because of mold);
and, to a lesser extent, the efﬁciency with which the juice was
pressed from the fruit.
The treatment of fresh juice with SO2 is important in the
prevention of enzymic and nonenzymic browning reactions of
the polyphenols; SO2 also complexes carbonyl compounds to
form stable hydroxysulfonic acids. If the apples contain a high
proportion of mold rots, appreciable amounts of carbonyls
such as 2,5-dioxogluconic acid and 2,5-D-threo-hexodiulose
will occur.

442

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)
Some key ﬂavor compounds in cider

Products of the Fermentation Process

Table 3

The primary objective of fermentation is the production of
ethyl alcohol, and the biochemical pathways that govern this
process are well recognized. Various intermediate metabolites can be converted to form a diverse range of other end
products, including glycerol (up to 0.5%). Diacetyl and
acetaldehyde may also occur, particularly if the process is
inhibited by excess sulﬁte and/or uncontrolled lactic
fermentation occurs. Other metabolic pathways will operate
simultaneously, with the formation of long- and short-chain
fatty acids, esters, lactones, and so on. Methanol is produced
in small quantities (10–100 mg l1) as a result of demethylation of pectin in the juice.
The tannins in cider change signiﬁcantly during fermentation; for instance, chlorogenic, caffeic, and p-coumaryl
quinic acids are reduced with the formation of dihydroshikimic acid and ethyl catechol. The most important
nitrogenous compounds in apple juice are the amino acids
asparagine, aspartic acid, glutamine, and glutamic acid;
smaller amounts of proline and 4-hydroxymethylproline
also occur. Aromatic amino acids are virtually absent from
apple juice. With the exception of proline and 4-hydroxymethylproline, the amino acids are largely assimilated by
the yeasts during fermentation. However, leaving the cider
on the lees signiﬁcantly increases the amino nitrogen content
as a consequence of the release of cell constituents during
yeast autolysis.
Inorganic compounds in cider are mostly derived from the
fruit and depend on the conditions prevailing in the orchard.
Their levels do not change signiﬁcantly during fermentation.
Trace quantities of iron and copper occur naturally, but the
presence of larger quantities derived from process equipment,
results in signiﬁcant black or green discoloration because of
the formation of iron and copper tannates, with ﬂavor
deterioration.

Group of compounds

Examples of important flavor metabolites a

Alcohols

Ethanol; propan-1-ol; butanol-1-ol; isopentan-1-ol; heptan-1-ol; hexan-1-ol; 2and 3-methylbutan-1-ol; 2-phenylethanol
Malic; lactic; butyric; acetic; hexanoic;
nonanoic; octanoic; succinic
Acetaldehyde; benzaldehyde; butylaldehyde;
hexanal; nonanal
Pyruvate; decalactone; decan-2-one
Amyl, butyl, and ethyl acetates; ethyl and butyl
lactate; diethyl succinate; ethyl benzoate;
ethyl hexanoate; ethyl guiacol; ethyl-2- and
ethyl-3-methylbutyrate; ethyl octanoate;
ethyl octenoate; ethyl decanoate; ethyl
dodecanoate
Methanediol; ethanthiol; methyl thioacetate;
dimethyl-disulfide; ethyl-methyl-disulfide;
diethyl-disulfide
Diacetyl; 1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-acetopyridine

Changes during Cider Maturation
Maturation results in further changes in the composition of the
cider, but these changes are not fully understood. The primary
effect of the MLF is the conversion of malic acid into lactic acid,
which, being a weak acid, results in a reduction in the apparent
acidity. Much of the lactic acid is esteriﬁed, with the formation
of ethyl, butyl, and propyl lactates. This removes harshness and
gives a more balanced, smoother ﬂavor. Other desirable ﬂavor
changes arising from the MLF include production of small
quantities of diacetyl, which gives a butterscotch ﬂavor to the
cider, although as noted, excessive levels of diacetyl are
undesirable.
Some strains of lactic acid bacteria also produce excessive
quantities of acetic acid if residual sugar is present in the
maturing cider. Sulfur aromas and ﬂavors resulting from yeast
autolysis are generally lost during maturation, although
unpleasant sulfur compounds, such as mercaptans, may be
produced if the cider is infected by ﬁlm yeasts. Acetic acid may
be formed either from the uncontrolled growth of heterofermentative lactic acid bacteria or, more commonly, from
the growth of strains of Acetobacter spp. Butyric ﬂavors are
generally caused by the growth of S. ludwigii and mousy ﬂavors

Organic acids
Aldehydes
Carbonyls
Esters

Sulfur compounds

Others
a

Compounds in italics are generally considered undesirable when more than traces
are present; compounds in bold are essential ﬂavor constituents.
Modiﬁed from Jarvis, B., Forster, M.J., Kinsella, W.P., 1995. Factors affecting the
development of cider ﬂavour. In: Board, R.G., Jones, D., Jarvis, B. (Eds.), Microbial
Fermentations: Beverages, Foods and Feeds. J. Appl. Bacteriol. Symp. Supplement.,
79, pp. 5s–18s (S.A.B. Symposium Series No. 24).

(believed to be the result of 1,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2-acetopyridine
and related compounds) are generally ascribed to the growth of
ﬁlm yeasts, such as Brettanomyces spp. Table 3 illustrates some
of the key ﬂavor compounds found in cider.

See also: Acetobacter ; Candida; Ecology of Bacteria and Fungi
in Foods: Inﬂuence of Redox Potential; Escherichia coli O157:
E. coli O157:H7; Fermentation (Industrial): Basic
Considerations; Fermentation (Industrial): Control of
Fermentation Conditions; Fermented Foods: Origins and
Applications; Natural Occurrence of Mycotoxins in Food;
Preservatives: Classiﬁcation and Properties; Preservatives:
Traditional Preservatives – Organic Acids; Permitted
Preservatives: Sulfur Dioxide; Saccharomyces: Saccharomyces
cerevisiae; Starter Cultures: Importance of Selected Genera;
Starter Cultures Employed in Cheesemaking; Wines:
Microbiology of Winemaking; Wines: Malolactic Fermentation;
Yeasts: Production and Commercial Uses.

Further Reading
Beech, F.W., 1972. English cider making: technology, microbiology and biochemistry.
In: Hockenhull, D.J.D. (Ed.), Progress in Industrial Microbiology, vol. 11. Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh, pp. 133–213.
Beech, F.W., Davenport, R.R., 1983. New prospects and problems in the beverage
industry. In: Roberts, T.A., Skinner, F.A. (Eds.), Food Microbiology: Advances and
Prospects. Academic Press, London, pp. 241–256 (S.A.B. Symposium Series No. 11).
Charley, V.L.S., 1949. The Principles and Practice of Cider-Making. Leonard Hill Ltd,
London.
Dinsdale, M.W., Lloyd, D., Jarvis, B., 1995. Yeast vitality during cider fermentation:
two approaches to the measurement of membrane potential. J Inst. Brew. 101,
453–458.

Cider (Cyder; Hard Cider)
Hammond, S.M., Carr, J.G., 1976. The antimicrobial activity of SO2 – with particular
reference to fermented and non-fermented fruit juices. In: Skinner, F.A.,
Hugo, W.B. (Eds.), Inhibition and Inactivation of Vegetative Microbes. Academic
Press, London, pp. 89–110 (S.A.B. Symposium Series No. 5).
Jarvis, B., 2001. Cider, perry, fruit wines and other alcoholic fruit beverages. In:
Arthey, D., Ashurst, P.R. (Eds.), Fruit Processing, second ed. Blackie Academic and
Professional, London, pp. 111–114.
Jarvis, B., Lea, A.G.H., 2000. Sulphite binding in ciders. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 35,
113–127.
Jarvis, B., Forster, M.J., Kinsella, W.P., 1995. Factors affecting the development of
cider ﬂavour. In: Board, R.G., Jones, D., Jarvis, B. (Eds.), Microbial Fermentations:
Beverages, Foods and Feeds. J. Appl. Bacteriol. Symp. Suppl., 79, pp. 5s–18s
(S.A.B. Symposium Series No. 24).

443

Lea, A.G.H., 2003. Cidermaking. In: Lea, A.G.H., Piggott, J.R. (Eds.), Fermented Beverage
Production, second ed. Blackie Academic and Professional, London, pp. 59–88.
Lea, A.G.H., 2009. Keeving. www.cider.org.uk/keeving.html last visited on 17 August
2011.
Lea, A.G.H., 2011. Small-Scale Cidermaking. www.cider.org.uk last visited on 17
August 2011.
Moss, M.O., Long, M.T., 2002. The fate of patulin in the presence of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Food Addit. Contam. 19, 387–399.
Swafﬁeld, C.H., Scott, J.A., Jarvis, B., 1997. Observations on the microbial ecology of
traditional alcoholic cider storage vats. Food Microbiol. 14, 353–361.
Williams, R.R. (Ed.), 1991. Cider and Juice Apples: Growing and Processing. University
of Bristol, Bristol.

