NUTRITIONREVIE
ws
VOL.14

APRIL 1956

No. 4

SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENTS LEAD TO NEW CONTROL PROBLEMS
Advances in our knowledge of nutrition
science have brought about changes in emphasis on problems in the enforcement of
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The first
problem that related to nutritional adequacy
of our diets, undertaken in 1926, was the
vitamin content of cod liver oil. With the
demonstration that cod liver oil was an important source of vitamin D and the knowledge that rickets was present in as many as
75 to 80 per cent of the babies in some
eastern cities, commerce in this item grew
at a tremendous rate.
There were also numerous attempts to
concentrate vitamin D and to incorporate it
in tablet or other pharmaceutical preparations that would be more acceptable to
children and adults. The method of assay
for vitamin D that was developed a t that
time has not been improved to an important
degree since. When compared with a cod
liver oil arbitrarily chosen as a standard, the
medicinal oils then supplied commercially
were found t o be surprisingly uniform in
their vitamin D content. The U. S. Pharmacopeia a t that time limited the oil that could
be called cod liver oil to that from the liver
of the genus Gadus. The medicinal cod liver
oil offered for human use has continued to
be of satisfactory quality. With very few
exceptions, all pharmaceutical preparations
alleged to be made from cod liver oil were
found devoid of vitamins A and D.
Our poultry industry expanded greatly
with the knowledge that the incorporation
of vitamin D in the ration made it possible
to grow chicks a t all seasons of the year. The
demand for cod liver oil for poultry feeding
soon exceeded the supply and there were
many reports of unsatisfactory growth response of chicks attributed to the quality of
the oil being supplied for feeds, only a small

fraction of which was of domestic origin. An
intensive examination of imports in 1936
resulted in the denial of entry of one third
of the oil offered for import because the oil
failed to meet the U. S. P. standard for
vitamin D. The rejected oils complied with
the chemical tests in the U. S. P., but were
usually darker in color and had odors and
flavors that were objectionable. The following year only 4 per cent of the oil examined
failed to meet the legal standard.
The passage of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act in 1938 gave greater recognition
to control of foods from the standpoint of
nutritional value. This law gives authority
to establish a standard for food when such
action will promote honesty and fair dealing
in the interest of the consumer. The interest
of the consumer is not served if the nutritive
value of a food is not assured. The only basis
for the requirement of certain levels of vitamins and iron in enriched flour is to guarantee a certain nutritive value.
The authority to prescribe labeling requirements for foods for special dietary uses
clearly recognizes advances that have been
made and may be made in our knowledge of
nutrition. It aims to assure that these
products will be marketed without taking
unfair advantage of the consumer. Shortly
after the passage of the lam, hearings were
held for the purpose of establishing regulations pertaining to the labeling of food for
special dietary uses. The regulations issued
in 1941 pertain to the labeling of vitamin
and mineral supplements, foods for control
of body weight, infant foods, non-nutritive
substances, and hyperallergenic foods. The
labeling requirements were designed to provide useful information for the intelligent
use of the products by the physician as well
as the layman. Fifteen years after the law
97

98

NUTRITION REVIEWS

was passed, the importance of this part of

the law became apparent when it provided
a basis for the labeling of foods whose use
depends on a low sodium content. The use
of foods of low sodium content for controlling blood pressure of unknown origin had
not been recognized at the time of the 1941
hearings, and there were no problems of
labeling to be controlled.
However, the problem of control of m i s leading representations will probably always
confront agencies engaged in food law enforcement. The gullibility of some purchasers
is amazing. We have seen an instance of a
man's profiting by more than a million
dollars by the sale of filtered Pacific Ocean
water, to which a little potassium iodide
was added. The theme of the representations
was that the product was an important
source of minerals, with some pertinent
quotations from well-known textbooks. The
producer in this instance had the advantage
of an unlimited supply of the raw material
at a minimum cost. Constant surveillance
of the many avenues through which representations for special dietary foods are made
is an important part of enforcement effort.
As the proportion of our food supply that
is subject to processing increases, those responsible for development of methods of
processing must also assume responsibility
for studying possible changes in nutritive
value, and be guided thereby. In the Food
and Drug Administration, we are concerned
not only with the general problem of food
processing and nutritive value, but we also
have the responsibility of detecting decep-

[April

tive practices that will result in interstate
shipment of inferior products.
The processes which have been developed
by our food technologists for serving food
with a minimum of preparation in the home
have served a very useful purpose, but they
have also opened the door for possible debasement of foods. Experience has shown
that if it were not for a small minority who
are guided solely by the profit motive, and
have no interest in serving their fellow men,
there would be little need for a Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and my comments here
are directed to that segment of the industry.
The more processes a food goes through
before it reaches the home, the greater the
opportunity for debasement and sophistication. The nutritive value of fresh food m
prepared in the home under good cooking
practices is the desirable standard of reference in assessing the nutritive value of processed and prepared foods. Vitamins A, C,
BI, and Bl2 are particularly susceptible to
destruction under adverse conditions. Every
step in the processing of foods may result
in some deterioration. Storage must also be
considered. By selection of ingredients it
may be possible to mask flavors that are
developed by specific processes and the consumer may be led to believe that the ingredients of a prepared meal are fresh foods,
when in fact they have been processed and
stored for a considerable period of time
before use.

E. M. NELSON
Chief, Division of Nutritim
Food and Drug Administration

THE COMPOSITION OF BODY TISSUES FOLLOWING OVEREATING IN MAN

A. Keys and his collaborators a t the UniNutritional studies in man have been
facilitated by the development of methods versity of Minnesota have been investigating
for the measurement of the total body fat the changes in body composition during
and the lean body mass. Recent progress in caloric deficiency and excess. In their now
this field has been the subject of earlier re- classic studies of starvation in previously
views (Nutrition Reviews 12,324 (1954); 13, normal subjects it is evident that much more
than mere loss of fat per se occurs'with
9 (1955)).

