Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (2001) 245–249

Laboratory exercise

The pentose phosphate pathway in the yeasts Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and Kloeckera apiculata, an exercise in comparative
metabolism for food and wine science students
Christopher C. Steel*, Paul R. Grbin1, Alan W. Nichol
National Wine and Grape Industry Centre, School of Wine and Food Sciences, Charles Sturt University, PO Box 588, Wagga Wagga,
New South Wales 2678, Australia

Abstract
Comparative cellular metabolism can be a diﬃcult area of biochemistry to teach in the undergraduate laboratory class. Student
practicals involving animal tissues generally require approval from animal ethic committees, and the relevance for students whose
primary interest in biochemistry is in the area of food and wine sciences, is often questioned. In this report, we present an
undergraduate practical exercise in which glucose catabolism via the pentose phosphate pathway is compared in two types of yeast
with direct relevance to the wine and food industries, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Kloeckera apiculata. The exercise is carried out
as a demonstration to second year undergraduate students, studying metabolic biochemistry. It is of some value in that it illustrates
comparative cellular metabolism in wine yeasts and introduces the students to the safe use of radioisotopes. r 2001 IUBMB.
Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Pentose phosphate pathway; Wine yeasts; Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Kloeckera apiculata; Hanseniaspora uvarum; [1-14C]-glucose;
Carbohydrate metabolism

1. Introduction
The pentose phosphate pathway, also called the
hexose monophosphate and the phosphogluconate
pathway serves two functions in the cell. It provides
reducing equivalents in the form of NADPH for lipid
and other biosynthetic purposes, and it provides
pentoses for the synthesis of nucleic acids, glycoproteins
and other substances [1]. Unlike glycolysis which
proceeds by formation of fructose-1, 6-bisphosphate,
glucose-6-phosphate is not further phosphorylated.
After conversion to phosphogluconate, carbon 1 of
glucose is lost in an oxidative decarboxylation reaction
to produce ribulose-5-phosphate which in turn produces
ribose-5-phosphate for nucleic acid synthesis (Fig. 1).
The loss of carbon dioxide from carbon 1 of glucose
may be taken as an approximate measure of the amount
of glucose metabolised via the pentose phosphate
pathway. Carbon dioxide arising from alcoholic fer*Corresponding author.
E-mail address: csteel@csu.edu.au (C.C. Steel).
1
Current address: Department of Horticulture, Viticulture and
Oenology, The University of Adelaide, Private Mail Bag 1, Glen
Osmond, SA 5064, Australia.

mentation of glucose originates from carbons 3 and 4.
Carbon dioxide produced as a result of respiration can
arise from all of the carbon atoms of the glucose,
including carbon 1, but can be inhibited by potassium
cyanide.
Using [1-14C]-glucose, the amount of glucose catabolised via the pentose phosphate pathway can be
estimated from the amount of [14C]-carbon dioxide
released. Given that the stoichiometry of the equation
for the oxidative portion of the pentose phosphate
pathway is such that one molecule of CO2 is produced
per molecule of glucose catabolised, (1), then the speciﬁc
activity of the released CO2 will be the same as that of
glucose.
Glucose þ 2NADPþ -CO2 þ2NADP þ Hþ þ Ribose:
ð1Þ
Eq. (1), also shows that the speciﬁc activity of the CO2
released is the ratio of mCi of released CO2 to mmol of
glucose consumed via the pentose phosphate pathway.
The latter can now be calculated from the known
speciﬁc activity of the added glucose.
We have developed an undergraduate practical
exercise, conducted as a demonstration to illustrate the
pentose phosphate pathway in two yeasts, Saccharo-

1470-8175/01/$20.00 r 2001 IUBMB. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S 1 4 7 0 - 8 1 7 5 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 9 7 - 2

246

C.C. Steel et al. / Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (2001) 245–249

Fig. 1. The oxidative portion of the pentose phosphate pathway showing the origin of released carbon dioxide.

myces cerevisiae, normally used in brewing and baking,
and Kloeckera apiculata (anamorph Hanseniaspora
uvarum) a wild yeast commonly associated with the
normal microﬂora of mature grapevine berries [2]. As
the two yeasts diﬀer considerably in ribonucleic acid
content [3], they exhibit major diﬀerences for ribose
synthesis and consequently show diﬀerent requirements
for glucose catabolism via the pentose phosphate
pathway.

2. Materials and methods
Cultures of S. cerevisiae and K. apiculata may be
obtained from various yeast culture collections around
the world. Both organisms can also be readily isolated

from either grape berries or wine making equipment [2].
We maintained the yeast culture on agar slopes of Malt
Yeast Extract Agar (Difco, Australia), and when
required sub-cultured the yeast into ﬂasks of malt yeast
extract broth (Difco, Australia) 12–18 h prior to the
commencement of the exercise.
Broth cultures in the logarithmic phase of growth
(determined by optical density estimations), are harvested using centrifugation (3000g, 20 min), and the wet
weight recorded. The cells are resuspended in potassium
phosphate buﬀer (10 mM, pH 6.3), to give a ﬁnal yeast
suspension of 5% (w/v).
[1-14C]-Glucose was obtained from Amersham, Australia and the scintillation counting ﬂuid used was
Ultima-Gold (Canberra-Packard, Australia). Hyamine
was also obtained from Canberra-Packard, Australia

C.C. Steel et al. / Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (2001) 245–249

while all other reagents were obtained from Sigma
Aldrich Pty Ltd (Castle Hill, Australia). Tables 1 and 2
list equipment, consumable items and preparation of
reagents required to conduct the exercise.
2.1. Experimental procedure
The reaction is carried out in a 10 cm headspace vial
with a crimp seal and teﬂon linear (Alltech, Baulkham
Hills, Australia). All manipulations of the radioactive
material are done in a fume cupboard. The incubation
mixture consists of 0.1 ml of the appropriate yeast
culture and 10 ml of KCN (0.1 M) to inhibit respiration.
The reaction vessel contains three glass beads to support
a Durham tube containing the hyamine solution (0.1 ml,
1.0 M in methanol). [1-14C]-Glucose (2.5 mCi/ml, 0.1 ml,

Table 1
Equipment and Consumable items required to set-up a demonstration
to illustrate the pentose phosphate pathway in yeasts
Equipment
10 cm headspace vials (Alltech Part number 6655) with crimp seals
(Alltech Part number 95756), containing three glass beads plus a
Durham tube (one tube per incubation)
Shaking water bath set at 301C (for incubations containing
unlabelled glucose)
Shaking water bath set at 301C in fume hood (for tubes containing
radio labelled glucose)
Spectrophotometer set to 510 nm
Automatic pipettes
High speed centrifuge
Consumables
Glucose oxidase reagent (prepared according to manufacturers
instructions)
Scintillation vials and lids
Centrifuge tubes
Pasteur pipettes and bulbs
Macrocuvettes (4.5 ml volume)
Contamination container for radioactive waste
Beaker containing disinfectant for disposal of waste yeast culture
1 ml syringes plus 23G needles
Disposable pipette tips (200 and 1000 ml)
Latex disposable gloves

Table 2
Details of reagents required to set-up a demonstration to illustrate the
pentose phosphate pathway in yeasts
Yeast suspensions. Grow yeast for 12–18 h at 301C in Malt broth with
shaking until the OD600 nm is approximately 0.2
Glucose (2.5 mM) (0.45 g glucose/1 l water)
Glucose (2.5 mM) containing 2.5 mCi of glucose-1-C14/ml
Hyamine solution, 1 M in methanol
Perchloric acid (0.4 M) (23.6 ml Perchloric acid in 1 l water)
Potassium cyanide (0.1 M) (0.75 g KCN/100 ml water)
Scintillant, Packard Ultima Gold, in dispenser set at 5 ml
Sodium carbonate (0.1 M) (1.06 g Na2CO3/100 ml water)
Hydrochloric acid (5 M)
Disodium hydrogen phosphate (0.4 M) (28.34 g Na2HPO4/500 ml water)

247

2.5 mM) is introduced into the incubation mixture via a
syringe and the vial sealed to start the experiment. A
second set of vials containing unlabelled glucose is also
prepared at the same time. Both control and radiolabelled tubes are incubated for 30 min with gentle
agitation at 301C in a water bath.
The tubes containing the unlabelled glucose are used
for the estimation of glucose catabolised using a
commercially available glucose oxidase assay kit, prepared according to the manufacturers directions (Boehringer-Mannheim, Australia). An aliquot (0.1 ml) of the
incubation mixture is removed to a centrifuge tube
containing perchloric acid (0.4 M, 1.0 ml) and the
contents mixed. The material is centrifuged (3000g,
5 min) and 0.2 ml of the supernatant removed. The acidtreated supernatant is then neutralised with disodium
hydrogen phosphate (0.4 M, 0.2 ml), mixed, and then
2.5 ml of the glucose oxidase reagent added. The
absorbance at 510 nm is read after 30 min and the
glucose concentration determined with reference to a
standard curve. The amount of glucose catabolised is
assayed by measuring glucose at both the end and the
start of the incubation period, using duplicate tubes
containing unlabelled glucose. Additionally, samples of
the yeast suspensions are assayed at the start of the
incubation period to conﬁrm that the amount of glucose
present in the washed culture is negligible prior to the
addition of the glucose. Any glucose detected is taken
into account in the ﬁnal calculation.
At the end of the incubation period, the carbon
dioxide in tubes containing the [1-14C]-glucose is drivenout of the incubation mixture by addition of sodium
carbonate (0.1 M, 0.05 ml). This is then acidiﬁed with a
volume of HCl (5 M, 0.05 ml) and the mixture incubated
for a further 45 min at 301C. The released CO2 is
absorbed by the strong organic base, hyamine, present
in the Durham tube. This solution is then transferred to
5 ml of scintillant and the radioactivity assayed using
liquid scintillation counting.
2.2. Calculation of glucose ﬂux through the pentose
phosphate pathway
Total glucose present at the start and end of the
incubation period is calculated with reference to the
standard curve. The total number of microcuries of
14
CO2 released for each sample is calculated using the
counts per minute recorded and correction made for
counting eﬃciency using an external standard. The
students are requested to calculate the speciﬁc activity of
the 14CO2 released by relating the total microcuries of
14
C-glucose added to each sample to total mmol of
glucose present at the start of incubation. As the speciﬁc
activity of glucose and carbon dioxide are the same, the
total mmol of 14CO2 produced for each sample can be
determined. From this, the percentage of the total

248

C.C. Steel et al. / Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (2001) 245–249

glucose catabolised via the pentose phosphate pathway
can be calculated.

3. Results and discussion
This exercise has been taught for over three years to
second year undergraduate students enrolled in degreelevel courses in wine & food sciences. The exercise was
originally conducted with students working in pairs, but
we found it more eﬀective to teach the exercise as a
demonstration. The demonstration commences with a
pre-practical talk, during which time the use of radioisotopes in metabolic studies and the theory of the
pentose phosphate pathway is discussed. Some background information on non-Saccharomyces spoilage
yeasts in wine production is also given. Prior to this
exercise, students have completed two additional practical exercises on carbohydrate metabolism; the ﬁrst of
these investigates the suitability of diﬀerent mono- and
disaccharides for alcoholic fermentation while the
second deals with the Pasteur eﬀect. In combination
with the lecture component, the students should therefore understand the function of the pentose phosphate
pathway in the overall context of carbohydrate metabolism.
At the conclusion of the demonstration, students are
provided with the raw data in the form of counts per
minute of the hyamine solution, disintegrations per
minute are then calculated with reference to a supplied
counting eﬃciency curve. A sample calculation table
that a student might prepare is illustrated in Table 3. In
order to perform the calculations, students have to
understand the stoichiometry of the equation for the
oxidative portion of the pentose phosphate pathway.

They also have to understand the origins of the carbon
dioxide in the pentose phosphate pathway, respiration
and alcoholic fermentation in yeast. Predicted results are
that the culture of K. apiculata will catabolise less
glucose via the pentose phosphate pathway than the
culture of S. cerevisiae. In their practical reports,
students have to comprehend why this is so, i.e.
diﬀerences in the requirements for ribose synthesis.
Concepts which the students are expected to grasp at
the conclusion of the exercise include:
*

*

*

*

*

Stoichiometry of the oxidative portion of the pentose
phosphate pathway,
The pentose phosphate pathway as an alternative
route to glycolysis for glucose catabolism,
The two primary functions of the oxidative portion of
the pentose phosphate pathway, i.e. formation of
pentose sugars for nucleic acids and NADPH for
lipid and other biosynthetic pathways,
That yeast diﬀer in their relative activity of the
pentose phosphate pathway because of diﬀering
ribonucleic acid and/or lipid biosynthesis requirements,
Use of radioisotope techniques in metabolic studies.

Typical study questions that might be used either
before or after the practical session include the following:
*

*

*

What function does the pentose phosphate pathway
have in yeast cells?
Why are there diﬀerences in activity of the pentose
phosphate pathway in diﬀerent types of yeast?
Explain why the speciﬁc activities are the same for
14
CO2 and 14C glucose?

Table 3
Sample calculation of glucose ﬂux through the pentose phosphate pathway. Students are provided with the cpm values for the two cultures, the
remainder of the table has to be calculated by the students
Incubation

a

cpm
Counting eﬃciencyb (%)
dpmc
14
CO2 releasedd (mCi)
14
CO2 releasede (mmol)
Glucose catabolisedf (mmol)
Glucose catabolised via pentose phosphate pathwayg (%)
a

S. cerevisiae

K. apiculata

30479
95
32083
0.01445
0.05781
0.25
23%

20731
95
21822
0.00983
0.03932
0.25
16%

Counts per minute as recorded on scintillation counter.
Percentage counting eﬃciency determined with reference to counting eﬃciency curve.
c
Disintegrations per minute.
d
Calculated by dividing the dpm value by 2.22  106.
e
Calculated by dividing mCi 14CO2 released by the speciﬁc activity, i.e. 0.25.
f
The glucose catabolised is calculated by the students with reference to a standard curve that they have prepared.
g
The amount of mmoles 14CO2 released is divided by mmol glucose catabolised and multiplied by 100 in order to obtain this percentage.
b

C.C. Steel et al. / Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 29 (2001) 245–249
*

If 1-14C glucose is catabolised in yeasts and muscle
cells to ethanol and lactate, respectively, indicate the
position of the radioactive label in the ﬁnal products.

A source of variation in the results can be the growth
stage yeast cultures. Both species should be in the
logarithmic phase of growth, cultures that are in the
stationary phase, have an overall slow rate of metabolism. If this is the case, little glucose is metabolised in the
30 min incubation period. However, this problem will
not arise if the growth of the two cultures is monitored
prior to the commencement of the demonstration.
Normally, cultures inoculated with a starter culture
12–18 h prior to the start of the demonstration will be in
the logarithmic phase of growth and suitable for the
exercise.
As an alternative to using two diﬀerent species of
yeast, it may be possible to employ mutants that are
deﬁcient in one more of the enzymes of the pentose
phosphate pathway, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁcient cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae [4–
6]. Alternatively, it could be possible to use mutant
strains of Escherichia coli, [7]. Such mutant strains could
of course be used as an adaptation of this exercise if it is
not possible to obtain cultures of the wine yeasts. This
however, is something that we have not attempted.
We have however, performed this experiment using
human red blood cells which utilise NADPH to
maintain haemoglobin in the reduced (Fe II) state.
Errors are magniﬁed with these cells as glucose
consumption and CO2 release is only 5–10% that of
yeast under these conditions. Because of this, and also
because of risk of infection, we do not recommend this

249

procedure to be used with human blood. Furthermore,
exercises involving animal tissues, generally require
approval from various animal ethic committees [8], this
of course is not the case if yeast cultures are used.

References
[1] T. Wood, The Pentose Phosphate Pathway, Academic Press,
London, 1985.
[2] G.H. Fleet, Ch. 1 The microorganisms of winemakingFisolation,
enumeration and identiﬁcation, in: G.H. Fleet (Ed.), Wine
Microbiology and Biotechnology, Harwood Academic Publishers,
Chur, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1–25.
[3] B.E.N. Todd, J. Zhao, G.H. Fleet, HPLC measurement of
guanine for the determination of nucleic acids (RNA) in yeasts, J.
Microbiol. Methods 22 (1) (1995) 1–10.
[4] S. Izawa, K. Maeda, T. Miki, J. Mano, Y. Inoue, A. Kimura,
Importance of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in the adaptive response to hydrogen peroxide in Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Biochem. J. 330 (2) (1998) 811–817.
[5] H. Juhnke, B. Krems, P. Kotter, K.D. Entian, Mutants that show
increased sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide reveal an important
role for the pentose phosphate pathway in protection of yeast
against oxidative stress, Mol. Gen. Genet. 252 (4) (1996) 456–464.
[6] I. Schaaﬀgerstenschlager, F.K. Zimmermann, Pentose-phosphate
pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiaeFanalysis of deletion
mutants for transketolase, transaldolase, and glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, Curr. Genet. 24 (5) (1993) 373–376.
[7] R. Johnson, A.I. Krasna, D. Rittenberg, 18O Studies on the
oxidative and nonoxidative pentose phosphate pathways in wildtype and mutant E. coli cells, Biochemistry 12 (10) (1973) 1969–
1977.
[8] NHMRC. Australian code of practice for the care, use of animals
for scientiﬁc purposes, 6th edition, Australian Government
Publishing Service, 1997.

