Y
Yeasts
R Tofalo and G Suzzi, University of Teramo, Mosciano Sant’Angelo (TE), Italy
ã 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

General Consideration and Taxonomy
The association of yeasts with human society was probably
initiated many thousands of years ago. Evidence for the production of fermented beverages by yeasts, mostly Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, dates back as far as 7000 BC, which is documented
by several archaeological sites in China, Iran, and Egypt.
Ancient humans unwittingly utilized yeasts to produce either
alcohol-containing beverages or carbon dioxide for leavening.
These practices and their associated yeasts spread throughout
the world, inducing a particular selection, that is,
‘domestication,’ in particular for some foods such as bread,
beer, and wine. However, the deliberate addition and commercial use of yeasts started only at the end of the nineteenth
century after isolation and identification by Pasteur. Today,
many species of yeasts contribute to the production of a myriad
of commodities other than bread, beer, and beverages. Foodgrade yeasts are now used as sources of high-nutritional-value
proteins, enzymes, and vitamins, and processing aids are
derived from them. With respect to foods and health foods,
yeasts are utilized as nutritional supplement, food additives,
conditioners, and flavoring agents and as starter cultures for
producing specific foods or for their probiotic activity. Antifungal activity is exhibited by some yeasts that can be considered as biocontrol agents of food spoilage. Unfortunately,
there are some drawbacks to yeast activity too, because some
can cause spoilage of many commodities and may lead to
pathogenic infections in immunocompromised persons or
lead to allergic reactions. Table 1 reports the main roles of
yeasts in food production and in the health of consumers.
The name yeast derives from the German word ‘gift,’ which
describes the foam formed during beer fermentation. Yeast can
be also described using the French word ‘levure,’ which indicates the role of yeasts inducing bread dough to rise. Yeasts are
eukaryotic microorganisms whose vegetative growth results
predominantly from budding or fission and that do not form
their sexual states within or upon a fruiting body. Yeasts have
two valid names: the first referring to the sexual state (teleomorph) and the second one to the asexual state (anamorph).
The rules of yeast taxonomy are established in the
‘International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and
plants,’ which was adopted at the 18 as apex International
Botanical Congress in Melbourne, Australia. The 5 as apex
edition of ‘The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study’ in 2011 describes
1500 yeast species; but this number is increasing. The

Encyclopedia of Food and Health

difference between the number of described species and that
of new species is due to the fact that some ecological niches are
far from being completely investigated and to the presence of
cryptic species, which still have not been carefully characterized. Yeast taxonomy is based on biochemistry and molecular
biology and is rapidly evolving. Criteria for differentiating
genera have focussed on spore and cell morphology, type of
conidiogenesis, life cycles, biochemical features, type of coenzyme Q, and G þ C content. However, DNA hybridization or
reassociation contributes to the establishment of relationships
among yeast species. Two species are considered conspecific if
they share more than 70% of DNA sequence homology, but
this method does not allow assessing phylogenetic relationships between yeasts. Recently, the application of rapid, easy,
and reliable molecular techniques allowed describing new
phylogenetic relationships. As a result, the number of separate
species groups was reduced and the diversity within them was
increased. The most diffused molecular methods used in the
identification of yeast species are based on the variability of the
ribosomal genes 5.8S, 18S, and 26S because they show a low
intraspecific polymorphism and a high interspecific variability.
The first marker used for separation of the hemiascomycetes
from the filamentous ascomycetes was the 18S rRNA gene.
Subsequently, the D1/D2 variable region of the 26S rRNA
(600 bp) has been adopted to differentiate basidiomycetes,
hemiascomycetes, and filamentous euascomycetes. The availability of whole-genome sequences of yeasts revolutionized the
taxonomy leading to the description of new markers for yeast
phylogeny. Traditionally, the main genera can be divided into
two groups: ascomycetes and basidiomycetes. However, budding and fission ascomycetes can now also be differentiated
from each other and from euascomycetes by molecular
methods, with the only exception of genus Eramascus (which
does not form budding cells). A similar approach is applied to
separate basidiomycetes from mushrooms and from taxa forming fruiting bodies.

The Yeast Cell and Its Organelles
Yeast cells possess ultrastructural features typical of other
eukaryotic cells, with the presence of membrane-bound organelles (Figure 1). Often, the words ‘yeast’ and ‘S. cerevisiae’ are
used as synonyms. Saccharomyces means ‘sugar fungus’ in
Greek. Yeast cells exhibit a great diversity with respect to cell

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384947-2.00762-5

593

594

Yeasts

Table 1

Main activities of yeasts in food production and in the human health

Activity

Yeast species

Effect

Food and
beverage
fermentation

Fermentation, flavor and color development, rheology

Food additive
production

Candida milleri, Debaryomyces hansenii, Galactomyces candidus,
Hanseniaspora uvarum, Kluyveromyces marxianus, K. lactis,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, S. cerevisiae, Kazachstania exigua,
Torulaspora delbrueckii, Zygosaccharomyces rouxii, Yarrowia
lipolytica
Lindnera jadinii, K. marxianus, S. cerevisiae, Y. lipolytica, Rhodotorula
glutinis, Sporidiobolus salmonicolor

Probiotic

Saccharomyces cerevisiae var. boulardii

Food spoilage

Brettanomyces bruxellensis, Pichia kudriavzevii, C. parapsilosis, D.
hansenii, H. uvarum, Pichia membranaefaciens, Rhodotorula
mucilaginosa, Rhodosporidium toruloides, S. cerevisiae, S. pombe,
Kazachstania exigua, Zygosaccharomyces bailii, Z. bisporus, and Z.
rouxii
Different yeast species

Allergenic

Pathogenic

Candida spp., Filobasidiella neoformans, P. kudriavzevii, W.
anomalus, K. marxianus, S. cerevisiae, and Rhodotorula spp.

Release of B vitamins, proteins, peptides, amino acids,
minerals, antioxidants, aromas, colorants, glutamic
acids, nucleotides, vanillin, citronellol, linalool, geraniol,
decalactones, b-glucans
Effect on enteric bacterial pathogen, maintenance of
epithelial barrier
Integrity, anti-inflammatory effects, effects on immune
response, trophic effects on intestinal mucosa, clinical
effects on diarrheal diseases
Blown cans of soft drinks, cloudy refermented wine, pink or
red slime dripping from refrigerated meat, white yeast
colonies on food, tainted fruit juices, off-odors, and offtastes
Food intolerance, migraines, respiratory problems, chronic
fatigue syndrome, dysfunctional gut syndrome, irritable
bowel syndrome
Mucocutaneous, cutaneous, respiratory, central nervous,
systemic, and organ infections

Nomenclature is in agreement with the yeasts: a taxonomic study (5 as apex edition).

Cytoplasm
Bud

Plasma membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Vacuole
Mitochondria
Nucleus
Peroxisomes
Periplasm

Golgi apparatus
Cell wall

Figure 1 Yeast cell and its main organelles.

size, shape, and color. Cell size may be 2–3 mm in length up to
20–50 mm with a diameter of 1–10 mm. The yeast cell wall is a
rigid structure about 100–200 nm thick and constituting about
25% of the total dry mass of the cell. The macromolecules that
compose the wall are highly glycosylated glycoproteins (mannoproteins), two types of b-glucans, and chitin. The overall
composition can vary considerably in relation with the growth
conditions. The surface plasma membrane of yeast is a lipid
bilayer, which harbors proteins serving as a cytoskeleton and
enzymes for cell wall synthesis, signal transduction, and transport. The lipid components comprise mainly phospholipids
and sterols (principally ergosterol and zymosterol). The periplasmic space is a region external to the plasma membrane

(35–45 Å) that contains proteins unable to permeate the cell
wall, such as invertase and phosphatase.
The yeast cytoplasm is an aqueous, slightly acidic colloidal
fluid that contains proteins, glycogen, other soluble macromolecules and larger macromolecular entities such as ribosomes, proteasomes, and lipid particles. Many essential
functions for cellular integrity are localized in the cytoplasm.
The cytoskeleton of yeast cells comprises microtubules and
microfilaments. In the center of the cell or slightly
excentrically, the nuclear structure is located, which is surrounded by a double membrane that separates the nucleoplasm from the cytoplasm. The outer nuclear membrane is
contiguous with the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Yeasts

The nucleolus within the nucleus is the specialized subnuclear
compartment for ribosome synthesis. The nuclear chromosomes are in the nucleoplasm and packed into a chromatin
structure; the genome sizes of yeasts are relatively constant and
generally range from 10 to 15 Mb, whereas the number and
sizes of the single chromosomes vary among species. Yeast cell
contains different organelles surrounded by individual membranes, mostly the endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi
apparatus, and transport vesicles that are necessary for the
manufacturing and trafficking of proteins, vacuoles,
mitochondria, and microbodies. Structurally, the endoplasmic
reticulum is a complex network of membranes, part of which is
connected to the nucleus. The endoplasmic reticulum membrane forms a continuous sheet enclosing a single internal
space called the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, separating it
from the cytosol. It is involved in the selective transfer of
secretory proteins between the endoplasmic reticulum and
the Golgi apparatus. It also plays a key role in lipid and protein
biosynthesis; in fact, it is the site of production of the transmembrane proteins and lipids for most of the cell’s organelles
(e.g., the endoplasmic reticulum itself, the Golgi apparatus,
lysosomes, and endosomes). The Golgi apparatus is composed
of stapled stacks of membranes called cisternae. Transport
vesicles, received from the endoplasmic reticulum, are further
processed and sorted for transport, for instance, releasing secretory proteins in the growth medium. Vacuoles are organelles
involved in intracellular protein trafficking, receiving proteins
from differing routes. In the vacuoles, there are degradative
processes catalyzed by different hydrolases, such as phosphatases, phospholipases, lipases, nucleases, endopeptidases, aminopeptidases, and carboxypeptidases. Vacuoles also are
involved in other physiological functions, such as the storage
of amino acids, polyphosphates, and some metal cations (Kþ,
Mg2þ, and Ca2þ). Yeast mitochondria resemble the organelles
found in higher eukaryotes, surrounded by an outer membrane and an inner membrane, the two of which embody an
intermediate space that contains the mitochondrial matrix. If
sufficient oxygen and carbon sources are supplied, few and
large mitochondria carry out respiration and synthesis of
ATP, whereas under anaerobic conditions, they reduce their
size and activity. Other functions are the synthesis and desaturation of fatty acids, biosynthesis of ergosterol, adaptation to
stress, mobilization of glycogen, and synthesis of enzymes.
Microbodies (peroxisomes and glyoxysomes) consist of a proteinaceous matrix, surrounded by a single membrane that is
involved in the primary metabolism of various carbon and
organic nitrogen sources, such as ethanol, methanol, primary
amines, n-alkanes, and fatty acids (oleic acid).

Metabolism
Yeasts are heterotrophic organisms in which the energy and
carbon metabolism are interconnected and anabolism is
coupled to catabolism. Yeasts preferentially metabolize sugars
that are converted principally to ethanol and carbon dioxide,
but they can utilize different carbon sources, such as amino
and organic acids, polyols, alcohols, fatty acids, and other
compounds, depending on the species. According to the

595

process utilized to generate energy (respiration and/or fermentation), they can be classified as:
 nonfermentative yeasts with only a respiratory metabolism;
 obligate-fermentative yeasts, only capable of metabolizing
glucose through alcoholic fermentation;
 facultative-fermentative yeasts, possessing either a fully
respiratory or a fermentative metabolism or even both in a
mixed metabolism depending on the growth conditions,
the type and concentration of the carbon source, and/or
oxygen availability.
The main nitrogen substrates used by yeasts during growth in
food are inorganic ammonium compounds and free amino
acids. Decarboxylation of amino acids leads to the production
of amines, whereas metabolism of arginine and citrulline gives
urea, precursor of the potential carcinogen ethyl carbamate.
Whereas yeasts produce organic acids, with succinic and acetic
acids being the main acids produced during sugar fermentation, some yeast species can use acetic and lactic acids and
weak monocarboxylic acids under starvation conditions.
Consumption of organic acids by yeasts may thus create conditions favorable for certain spoilage microorganisms. In
cheese, lactate catabolism by some species such as Debaryomyces hansenii, Kluyveromyces lactis, and Kluyveromyces marxianus induces an increase of pH at the cheese surface, having a
key role during ripening.
Sulfates are utilized to produce volatile sulfur compounds
such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and at lesser amounts
mercaptans, thioesters, and other organic sulfites. Yeasts also
show proteolytic and lipolytic activities depending on the species and strain.

Yeasts in Fermented Food and Beverages
Yeasts are undoubtedly one of the most important groups of
microorganisms that are exploited for the elaboration of
fermented foods. Fermentation is one of the oldest and most
economical methods of producing and preserving food, providing also a natural way to reduce the volume of the material
to be transported, to destroy undesirable components, to
enhance the nutritive value and appearance of the food, to
reduce the energy required for cooking, and to make a safer
product. In these processes, mixed cultures of yeasts, bacteria,
and fungi are active, participating either in parallel or in a
sequential manner with a changing dominant microbiota
during the course of the fermentation. Some yeast species are
included in starter cultures for the production of specific types
of fermented foods like cheese, bread, sourdoughs, fermented
meats, and fermented vegetable products. Common fermenting yeasts, often selected as starter cultures, belong to the
Saccharomyces genus, which results in alcoholic fermentation.

Yeasts in Dairy Products
Yeasts play an important role in flavor and texture development during the production of fermented milks, such as kefir
and koumiss, and the ripening of cheese. They are used as
secondary starter cultures to enhance the aroma or improve

596

Yeasts

the growth of lactic acid bacteria or brevibacteria. The most
important and dominant species, besides S. cerevisiae, are
D. hansenii, Yarrowia lipolytica, K. marxianus, and Galactomyces
candidus.

S. pastorianus (synonym S. carlsbergensis)). More than a thousand single different starter cultures of brewing yeasts have
been described, varying in their technological properties,
such as aroma production, rate and degree of attenuation,
flocculation, oxygen requirement, and reproduction.

Yeasts in Fermented Meat Products
Studies on the presence and role of yeasts in fermented meat
product are limited. The high salt concentration and the low
water activity that are typical of fermented sausages favor the
growth of Debaryomyces species, mostly D. hansenii, Y. lipolytica,
and various Candida species, contributing to the development
of color (by removing the oxygen) and flavor (by degrading
peroxides and via lipolytic and proteolytic activities). Hydrolytic and oxidative changes carried out by yeasts during ripening produce the distinctive flavors of these products.

Cash Crops
Cocoa beans and coffee beans must undergo processes that
involve the action of yeasts of various species of Saccharomyces, Hanseniaspora, Kluyveromyces, Saccharomycopsis, Candida,
and Pichia. Cocoa beans have to be fermented to drain the
pulp, stabilize the beans, and generate precursors for chocolate flavor, whereas coffee beans are mostly fermented to
remove the pulp and the mucilaginous materials from the
seeds.

Fermentation of Cereal Products
Cereals, as a global staple food, are often fermented to
improve shelf life and nutritional properties in comparison
with the raw material. Fermented cereal products are produced from different cereal substrates and a number of them
consist of a combination with legumes, thus improving the
overall protein quality of the fermented product. Fermentation improves the nutritional value, sensory properties, and
functional qualities. Besides the global importance of (sourdough) bread, a wide variety of different products come from
Africa and Asia, as is the case for koko, banku, panjabi waries,
papadams, jalebis, idli, dosa, dhokla, kishk, tarhana, ogi,
kenkey, pozol, injera, and kisra. The microbiota responsible
for the fermentation is in many cases indigenous and includes
lactic acid bacteria, yeasts, and fungi. Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strains are often found in the fermentation of various cereal
products. Other yeast species frequently detected are Kazachstania exigua, Candida milleri, Torulaspora delbrueckii, and
Pichia spp. The yeast species diversity in fermented cereal
products, as well as their numbers, is affected by the degree
of tolerance to the organic acids produced by the lactic acid
bacteria.

Fermented Beverages
As regards the fermented beverages produced by musts
obtained from fruits (grape, cider, mixed tropical fruits, etc.),
the natural fermentation is started by some non-Saccharomyces
yeasts, such as species of Hanseniaspora uvarum, Candida
stellata, Wickerhamomyces anomalus, Metschnikowia pulcherrima,
and other yeasts. After 1 or 2 days, species of Saccharomyces,
in particular S. cerevisiae, develop and dominate fermentation
by forming high amounts of ethanol. During fermentation,
many compounds are produced or metabolized by yeasts
contributing to the aroma of beverages. However, during
must fermentation, yeasts can produce off-flavors too, as is
the case for Brettanomyces/Dekkera species that are reported to
be involved in wine spoilage. Nowadays, selected starter
cultures of S. cerevisiae are generally used to carry out must
fermentation. In beer fermentation, two types of Saccharomyces
yeasts are involved, that is, ale yeasts (top-fermenting yeasts,
S. cerevisiae) and lager yeasts (bottom-fermenting yeasts,

Yeast for Health
Yeast as Probiotics and Nutraceuticals
The World Health Organization officially defined probiotics as
“live microorganisms which, when administered in adequate
amounts, confer a health benefit on the host.” Most probiotic
microorganisms are bacteria, usually including selected strains
of certain genera of Lactobacillus spp. or Bifidobacterium spp. In
recent years, the interest in using yeasts as probiotics increased,
not only for human health but also to improve growth and
health of animals and birds, in particular in aquaculture or
with respect to industry cattle, pigs, and poultry.
Yeasts are able to face the stresses of the gastrointestinal tract,
such as enzymes, bile salts, organic acids, and considerable variations of pH and temperature. The first species described as an
effective biotherapeutic agent has been S. cerevisiae var. boulardii,
isolated from lychee fruit in Indochina in the 1920s. This yeast is
commonly used as a probiotic in different countries, as both a
preventive agent and a therapeutic agent for diarrhea and other
gastrointestinal disorders caused by the administration of antimicrobial agents. S. boulardii has many properties, such as survival
transit capacity through the gastrointestinal tract, among other
reasons because its temperature optimum is 37  C, both in vitro
and in vivo. Moreover, the species exerts inhibitory effects toward
various enteric pathogens as its cell wall shows binding capacity
to enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Additionally, the yeast inhibits adherence of
Clostridium difficile. Other probiotic beneficial effects on human
health associated to the administration of S. boulardii include:
 maintenance of epithelial barrier integrity and permeability,
 restoration of the tight-junction structure,
 reduction of inflammation during bacterial infection by
interference with host cell signaling pathways,
 stimulation of the host cell immunity in response to pathogenic infections,
 prevention of reaction to food antigens in particular when
mucosal permeability is increased.
Other species, such as D. hansenii, T. delbrueckii, K. lactis,
K. marxianus, and Kazachstania lodderae, have also shown tolerance to passage through the gastrointestinal tract and

Yeasts

inhibition of enteropathogens. Recently, many researchers
have focussed on the antioxidant ability and cholesterol assimilation of yeasts. Some reports indicated that S. cerevisiae,
K. lactis, and Pichia kudriavzevii can remove cholesterol in vitro.
Yeasts can also produce nutraceuticals useful for the development of functional foods and for the protection from cardiovascular disease. The most important compounds seem to
be the b-glucans, which act as bioactive polysaccharides, and
bioactive peptides that inhibit angiotensin I-converting
enzyme activity, reducing peripheral blood pressure and exerting antihypertensive effects in vivo. Only some yeast species,
that is, K. marxianus and S. cerevisiae, have been shown to
produce these compounds in fermented milks such as koumiss
and kefir. Recent studies also indicate that some foodborne
yeasts (especially D. hansenii and S. cerevisiae) are able to
reduce the potential genotoxic risk due to mutagenic and genotoxic compounds. A recent study indicated that S. cerevisiae
and D. hansenii show inhibitory activity against two model
genotoxins, 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide and N-methyl-N0 -nitroN-nitrosoguanidine. The antigenotoxic activity is probably due
to the formation of a complex between genotoxins and thermolabile soluble cellular oligosaccharides (i.e., mannans and
glucans). Nevertheless, a similar complex may also occur
between the genotoxins and other compounds derived from
yeast metabolism such as polyamines, mainly spermidine and
spermine or the glutathione system.
These healthy effects appear to be promising features for the
use of well-characterized yeasts as natural protective agents. In
addition, yeast cells are also good sources of vitamins (thiamine, pantothenic acid, riboflavin, biotin, folic acid, B6, and
B12), ergosterol, and coenzyme Q.

Antioxidants
In the past, yeasts and yeast extracts were used as a source of
antioxidant compounds to be added to prevent oxidation of
food products. Now, natural antioxidants, presumed to be safer
for human, can also be used in nutraceutical applications as
supplements. Natural antioxidants act by donating hydrogen
protons to substrates, rendering them nonreactive to reactive
oxygen species. This involves enzymes such as catalases, superoxide dismutases, glutathione (L-g-glutamyl-L-cysteinylglycine),
and NADP-dependent dehydrogenases. Several compounds
involved in antioxidant actions are produced by yeasts and can
be used to retard oxidative degeneration of fatty substances in
food and to improve health and well-being in nutraceutical
supplements. They consist of torularhodin, coenzyme Q, glutathione, hydroxymethyl and hydroxyethyl furanone (2H), tocotrienol, a-tocopherols, and other forms of tocopherols,
riboflavin (vitamin B2), and derived flavins. Several oxygenated
carotenoids, selenium-enriched yeast cells, the wine component
resveratrol, octacosanol, cell wall b-glucans, proteins produced
in yeasts under oxidative stress, sulfur-containing amino acids,
and cytochrome C are present at the end of fermentation in the
products and/or in the yeast biomass.

Single-Cell Proteins
The use of yeasts for single-cell protein (SCP) production is
convenient, resulting in nutritional supplements for animal

597

feeds and human foods. In fact, yeast SCP is considered as a
potential source of proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins,
minerals, and essential amino acids. SCP for human consumption should be free from nucleic acid as purine bases are
metabolized to uric acid, a problem for some humans that do
not possess the enzyme uricase. SCP production has been
obtained by yeasts cultivated in mixtures of sugars and minerals, such as molasses, starch, cassava, whey products, brewing
by-products, potato and cellulosic wastes, or other waste
streams from agricultural and industrial processes. The yeasts
are washed, thermolyzed and dried, and usually spray-dried
into a powder. The production of value-added SCP from inexpensive substrates could beneficially contribute to the food
supply. Whereas for human applications, S. cerevisiae (baker’s
and brewer’s yeast) is the currently the organism of choice,
animal feeds rely on Lindnera jadinii.

b-Glucans
b-Glucans have several beneficial properties and have found a
variety of uses in human and in veterinary medicine, immunopotentiation, pharmaceutical, cosmetic and chemical
industries, and food and feed production. Yeast is a good source
of b-glucans that are present in the cell walls as branch-onbranch molecules containing linear (1,3)-b-glucosyl chains
joined through (1,6)-linkages. Spray-dried yeast b-glucans are
useful for food production, as food thickeners, replacers,
dietary fibers, emulsifiers, and films. Furthermore, yeast
glucans have important properties as water-holding, fat-binding, and oil-binding characteristics, as well as gelling properties.
For these reasons, they can also be used in the production of
sausages and meat products, mayonnaise, and other food
products, such as dressings, frozen desserts, sauces, yogurts,
and other fermented milks and soft doughs. They are safe for
oral application and have a GRAS (generally recognized as safe)
status.

Allergenic or Pathogenic Yeasts
Viable populations of a diversity of yeast species present in
fermented foods (dairy products, fermented and cured meats,
fruits and fruit salads, table olives, and beer and wine) are
unknowingly and inadvertently ingested. Unlike bacteria,
viruses, and some filamentous fungi, yeasts are rarely associated with outbreaks of foodborne gastroenteritis or other
foodborne infections or intoxications. However, an increase
of yeast infections is reported, and some yeasts are now
considered as opportunistic pathogens, such as Candida albicans and Filobasidiella neoformans, which can cause mucocutaneous, cutaneous, respiratory, central nervous, systemic, and
organ infections. Moreover, other species that are frequently
found in foods, such as P. kudriavzevii, W. anomalus,
K. marxianus, S. cerevisiae, and various Rhodotorula species,
can be potential pathogens. Even S. cerevisiae, intensively
used in industrial processes, has been described as a pathogen
in 1958. It displays low virulence against humans, but invasive S. cerevisiae infections have been increasingly common in
recent decades, having been identified in blood cultures,

598

Yeasts

including those from immunocompetent subjects. Therefore,
vigilance on yeasts and foodborne diseases is required
because there is a literature that connects yeast presence in
foods to the onset of a broad range of allergic and hypersensitive reaction in humans. Indeed, yeasts may cause or
contribute to food intolerances, migraines, respiratory problems, chronic fatigue syndrome, dysfunctional gut syndrome,
and irritable bowel syndrome. Generally, these adverse
reactions could be associated to the yeast cells themselves,
yeast extracts, or associated metabolites such as sulfur dioxide, proteins, and biogenic amines. The latter, especially histamine, tyramine, phenylethylamine, putrescine, and
cadaverine, are associated to headaches, hypotension,
migraines, and digestive disturbances in humans. Although
the quantity produced is not enough to create health
concerns, yeasts can thus contribute to the accumulation of
biogenic amines in fermented foods and beverages.

Yeasts Technological Features
Aromas
During fermentation, yeasts produce many aromas. For alcoholic beverages, this involves over 400 different chemical compounds, of which fusel alcohols, fatty acids, and their ester
represent the main groups. In addition, carbonyl compounds,
acetals, phenols, hydrocarbons, nitrogen compounds, sulfur
compounds, lactones, sugars, and a variety of other unclassified compounds are present. Besides, yeasts also contribute to
the aroma of bread, cheese and other dairy products, fermented meat, cocoa, vanilla, and fermented soy-derived foods.

Colors
The yeasts have been used as sources of a number of carotenoids for use as food colorants such as astaxanthin,
b-carotene and g-carotene, lycopene, lutein, torulene,
torularhodin, and zeaxanthin. For instance, Phaffia rhodozyma and Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous have been used in
industrial-scale production of the carotenoid astaxanthin.
This compound can be used for aquafeed as a colorant
or as an immunostimulant in food or in poultry, fish, or
mammalian feed. Other colorants produced by yeast fermentation are riboflavin and caramel colors produced
from the processing of yeast extracts.

Flavors
Flavors produced by yeasts, such as yeast extract, autolysates,
and dried preparations, are commonly used in the food industry as a source of savory accents (roasted, nutty, meaty, and
other flavors). These flavors can originate from yeast metabolic
products including alcohols, amino acids and derivatives, carbohydrates and glycosides, fatty acids and their esters, organic
acids, lactones, and aldehydes. Among the yeast-derived products, yeast extract is often produced from spent brewer’s yeast
and provided as powders or pastes. Yeast extracts are flavor
ingredients of which the quality is affected by the specific cell
composition. Hydrolyzed edible proteins and peptides from

yeasts, which are a good source of the essential amino acid
L-lysine, are limited in sulfur-containing amino acids, such as
cystine and methionine, which have to be added. Some extracts
are also enriched in glutamic acid and nucleotides that function as strong flavor enhancers. Yeast-derived lecithin, inositol,
glycerol, and glycolipids, recovered from the cell membrane
lipid extracts or from fermentation broth, can be used as flavors in foodstuffs as emulsifiers and surfactants. Moreover, they
show additional health benefits so they can also be used as
food supplements.

Yeast Spoilage
Food and beverages spoilage by yeasts has been well documented in many recent reviews. Yeasts can cause defects in the final
products, and problems with hygiene procedures appear upon
failures in the decontamination procedure, leading to significant economic losses. Generally, yeast spoilage occurs in food
products characterized by a retarded or inhibited bacterial
growth, that is, without bacterial competition. Foods that are
usually subjected to yeast spoilage are characterized by low pH,
high sugar levels (e.g., more than 10%, w/v), high salt levels
(more than 5% NaCl), and low levels of organic acids (e.g.,
sorbic, benzoic, and acetic). Fruits and derived products
(juices, drinks, pulps, concentrates, and syrups), confectionery
products, alcoholic beverages, carbonated beverages, vegetable
salads with acid dressings, salt- and acid-based sauces, dairy
products, and fermented or cured (salted) meat products represent the main candidates for yeast spoilage.
The main spoilage yeast species are B. bruxellensis,
P. kudriavzevii, Candida parapsilosis, D. hansenii, H. uvarum, Pichia
membranaefaciens, Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, Rhodosporidium
toruloides, S. cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, K. exigua,
Zygosaccharomyces bailii, Z. bisporus, and Z. rouxii. However,
with the years, some other common food-contaminating yeasts
have been described, such as Y. lipolytica, Zygosaccharomyces
lentus, Z. kombuchaensis, Candida wyomingensis, C. boidinii,
Cryptococcus uzbekistanensis, Candida natalensis, and Pseudozyma
antarctica. The main alterations caused by yeasts in food include
the alteration of physical and sensorial properties, discoloration,
gas production, cloudiness, sedimentation or pellicle formation,
and the formation of off-flavors. For instance, D. bruxellensis is
responsible of serious economic losses in the wine industry
because it produces volatile phenols (4-ethylguaiacol and
4-ethylphenol), which generate off-odors in wines. Exposure
of beer to air will induce the growth of oxidative yeast genera
such as Pichia, Debaryomyces, Candida, and Hansenula, which
cause off-flavors and ferment residual dextrans in the beer.

Yeast as Biocontrol Agents
Several yeast species show a strong antagonistic activity against
filamentous fungi. For this reason, they can be used for biocontrol of fungi that cause pre- and postharvest spoilage of
fruits and vegetables, increasing food quality and hygienic
safety. As such, they can the control the development of Botrytis, Penicillium, Aspergillus, and Rhizopus spp., reducing the need

Yeasts

for chemical fungicides and, consequently, their potential
oncogenic risks. The yeast species showing biocontrol capacity
are mostly M. pulcherrima, Candida sake, Sporobolomyces roseus,
W. anomalus, Aureobasidium pullulans, and various Cryptococcus.
For commercial use, the main species diffused are C. oleophila
and Pseudozyma flocculosa, which are registered as Aspire and
Sporodex, respectively. The combination between C. oleophila
and two bacterial strains is widely used as biocontrol agent of
postharvest diseases of citrus and apple fruits. Yeast antagonistic activity is mainly related to the production of killer toxins,
inhibitory proteins and peptides, lytic glucanases, and chitinases, which act against fungal cell wall. Moreover, they inhibit
fungal development through nutrient competition and the
production of toxic metabolites, such as ethanol, acetaldehyde,
ethyl acetate, and fatty acids. The use of yeasts as biocontrol
agents has several advantages because they are easy to cultivate,
are characterized by a fast growth, and can be found in several
ecological niches.

Conclusion
In summary, yeasts play an essential role in many food and
beverage fermentations, conferring the required stability,
safety, and sensory properties to the final product. Moreover,
several beneficial health effects are clearly evident such as
probiotic (prevention and treatment of intestinal diseases and
immunomodulatory action), antigenotoxic, and antioxidant
activities. Recent advances in molecular biology (DNA recombination, mutagenesis, etc.) can be applied to obtain specialized yeasts with new properties to improve human life.

See also: Cheese: Chemistry and Microbiology; Cheese: Composition
and Health Effects; Fermented Foods: Use of Starter Cultures;

599

Fermented Foods: Fermented Meat Products; Fermented Foods:
Fermented Vegetables and Other Products; Fermented Foods:
Composition and Health Effects; Fermented Foods: Fermented Milks;
Food Additives: Classification, Uses and Regulation; Food Allergies;
Foodborne Pathogens; Functional Foods; Probiotics; Spoilage: Yeast
Spoilage of Food and Beverages; Wines: Wine Production.

Further Reading
Becskei A (ed.) (2011) Yeast genetic networks: methods and protocols. New York:
Springer þ Business Media.
Boulton C and Quain D (eds.) (2006) Brewing yeast and fermentation. UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Feldmann H (ed.) (2011) Yeast: molecular and cell biology. UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Gonzalez R, Munoz R, and Carrascosa AV (eds.) (2011) Molecular wine microbiology.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Kurtzman CP, Fell JW, and Boekhout T (eds.) (2011) The yeasts a taxonomic study, 5th
ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Piskur J and Compagno C (eds.) (2014) Molecular mechanisms in yeast carbon
metabolism. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Pretorius IS (2000) Tailoring wine yeast for the new millennium: novel approaches to
the ancient art of winemaking. Yeast 16: 675–729.
Querol A and Fleet GH (eds.) (2006a) Biodiversity and ecophysiology of yeasts. Berlin
Heidelberg: Springer.
Querol A and Fleet GH (eds.) (2006b) Yeasts in food and beverages. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer.
Satyanarayana T and Kunze G (eds.) (2009) Yeast biotechnology: diversity and
applications. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Xiao W (ed.) (2014) Yeast protocols, 3 as apex ed. New York: Springer þ Business
Media.

Relevant Websites
http://www.ifr.ac.uk/research/national-collection-yeast-cultures/ – Institute of Food
Research.
www.yeastgenome.org – Stanford University.

